GOOD
EVENING, EVERYONE AND WELCOME
TO THE DECEMBER 1ST MEETING
OF THE ANN ARBOR CITY COUNCIL.
IF YOU'RE ABLE PLEASE RISE AND
JOIN US FOR A MOMENT OF SILENCE
FOLLOWED BY THE PLEDGE
OF ALLEGIANCE
.
I PLEDGE ALLEGIANCE TO THE FLAG
OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
AND TO THE REPUBLIC FOR WHICH
IT STANDS ONE NATION UNDER
INDIVISIBLE WITH LIBERTY AND
JUSTICE FOR ALL WHAT OUR CLARK
PLEASE CALL THE ROLE OF COUNSEL
MEMBER DISH HERE ULTIMATE
HARRISON HERE, COUNCILOR WATSON
HERE TO.
HERE COMES WHERE DENHA CARE
CUSTOMER GHAZI EDWYN ABSENTS
MAYOR TAYLOR HERE ELSEWHERE
EITHER HERE COUNCILOR ACKMANN
ABSENT COUNCILOR BRIGGS HERE,
CUSTOMER CORNELL HERE WE HAVE A
QUORUM.
>> THEY HAVE A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE AGENDA MOVE BY
COUNTY COUNCIL SECOND BY KEFIR
BRIGG'S DISCUSSION OF THE
AGENDA ALL IN FAVOR OR OPPOSE
THE AGENDA IS APPROVED.
ARE THERE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM OUR CITY ADMINISTRATOR?
NO, MAYOR, WE DO HAVE ONE
INTRODUCTION TODAY THAT IS OUR
PERIODIC REPORT FROM THE CHAIR
OF THE INDEPENDENT COMMUNITY
POLICE OVERSIGHT COMMISSION.
>> CHAIR CARTER, CHAIR CARTER,
WELCOME.
YOU HAVE THE CONN.
THANK YOU, MR TAYLOR.
GOOD EVENING, MR ADMINISTRATOR.
COUNCIL MEMBERS.
MADAM CLERK, I HOPE ALL OF YOU
WONDERFUL THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY
WE DID AND IT'S GOOD TO BE BACK
TO WORK I SUPPOSE THERE ARE A
LOT THERE ARE A LOT OF THINGS
GOING ON.
WE HAD OUR LAST MEETING OF THE
YEAR THIS PAST TUESDAY.
WE DO NOT MEET IN DECEMBER AND
SO OUR NEXT MEETING WILL BE THE
FOURTH TUESDAY IN JANUARY A
COUPLE OF THINGS THAT I THINK
WE WANT TO LET YOU KNOW WE HAVE
A POLICY COMMITTEE THAT'S BEEN
REVIEWING ALL THE POLICIES FOR
THE AND OUR POLICE DEPARTMENT
SO FAR THEY'VE REVIEWED ONE
HUNDRED AND THIRTY POLICIES WE
DON'T HAVE A LOT OF THINGS TO
ADD OR SUGGEST BUT WE WILL BE
THERE ABOUT HALFWAY THROUGH AND
SO HOPEFULLY BY THE FIRST
OF THE YEAR THEY'LL BE ABLE TO
OUR FIRST MEETING IN JANUARY
WE'LL BE ABLE TO PREPARE A
COMPLETE REPORT AS TO WHAT
IMPACT WHAT OUR TAKE IS ON THE
POLICIES SO FAR WE'VE HAD VERY
LITTLE TO TO ADD THREE OF THE
COMMISSIONERS INCLUDING MYSELF
DID GO TO THE NACOLE CONFERENCE
IN NOVEMBER.
THAT'S THE NATIONAL NATIONAL
ASSOCIATION OF OVERSIGHT
AGENCIES AND IT IS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY WAS HELD THIS YEAR IN
MANY ANAPOLIS AND AS YOU MAY
RECALL THAT WAS THE SITE OF THE
MURDER OF GEORGE FLUEY.
AND SO IT WAS QUITE AN
INTERESTING OCCASION TO BE
THERE.
THERE IS A MEMORIAL TO GEORGE
PHILIP AND TWO OF OUR
COMMISSIONERS WERE ABLE TO GO
AND AND SEE
I THINK IN TERMS
OF WHAT WE ARE PLANNING AS I
MENTIONED THE LAST TIME I
SPOKE, WE ARE PLANNING A SPRING
SYMPOSIUM AND MORE INFORMATION
WILL COME OUT.
WE'RE ALSO GOING TO BE WORKING
ON OUR ANNUAL REPORT FOR TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE AND HOPEFULLY WE'LL
HAVE THAT TO YOU BY FEBRUARY
OF NEXT YEAR.
FINALLY I JUST WANTED TO SAY
THAT SEVERAL OF OUR
COMMISSIONERS WERE ABLE TO
ATTEND THE SHOWING OF A RIPPLE
IN ANN ARBOR AND THAT WAS QUITE
MOVING AND TO THINK THAT THAT
HAPPENED HERE IN OUR WONDERFUL
CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
BUT WE DID WANT TO GIVE OUR
THANKS AND OUR APPRECIATION TO
COUNCIL MEMBER HARRISON FOR ALL
OF HER WORK ON THAT.
WE DO HAVE A NEW COMMISSIONER
WHO WILL BE JOINING US SOON.
>> WE ARE HAPPY FOR THAT IF
THERE ARE NO QUESTIONS.
THAT IS MY REPORT FOR THIS
EVENING.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> WE NOW COME TO PUBLIC
COMMENT RESERVE TIME, PUBLIC
COMMENT RESERVE TIME IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC TO SPEAK TO COUNCIL AND
THE COMMUNITY ABOUT MATTERS
OF MUNICIPAL INTEREST TO SPEAK
OF PUBLIC COMMENT RESERVE TIME
ONE NEEDS TO HAVE SIGNED UP IN
ADVANCE BY CONTACTING OUR CITY
CLERK SPEAKERS IN ALL INSTANCES
WILL HAVE THREE MINUTES IN
WHICH TO SPEAK.
SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE ATTENTION
TO THE TIME OUR CLERK OR THE
TIME CLOCK WILL NOTIFY YOU WHEN
THIRTY SECONDS ARE REMAINING
AND WHEN YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED
WHEN YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED
PLEASE CONCLUDE YOUR REMARKS
AND CEDE THE FLOOR FIRST
SPEAKER TODAY IS ADAM
JUSZKIEWICZ.
HELLO I AM ADAM JUSZKIEWICZ AND
I LIVE IN THE FOURTH WARD.
FIRST I WOULD LIKE TO TALK
ABOUT DC TO THE PUBLIC SUMMARY
THE RBA S DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT
MANY IN THE COMMUNITY AND ON
THIS BODY HAVE WHAT I BELIEVE
ARE VALID CONCERNS ABOUT THIS
PUBLIC PRIVATE AGREEMENT.
BROWNFIELD AABA S I EMAILED YOU
A WHILE BACK WITH MY CONCERNS.
THIS IS A PROJECT THAT I WANT
TO BE ABLE TO SUPPORT BUT I
STILL HAVE VERY CONFLICTED
THOUGHTS ON IT.
I HOPE THE SUMMARY WILL CHANGE
MY MIND OR AT LEAST HELP ME
BETTER ARTICULATE MY CONCERNS.
I APPRECIATE THE TRANSPARENCY
AND LOOK FORWARD TO READING IT.
PLEASE VOTE YES ON DC TWO
TONIGHT.
ADDITIONALLY, I'VE SPOKEN TO
YOU A NUMBER OF TIMES BEFORE
ABOUT VISION ZERO.
I WAS DISMAYED WHEN I WATCHED
LAST MONTH'S TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION MEETING.
OUR STAFF EXPLAINED THAT
ESSENTIALLY WE CAN'T FIX THIS
CRISIS THROUGH POLICY AND
ENGINEERING.
IT HAS TO BE DONE THROUGH
EDUCATION AND ENFORCEMENT WHILE
I AGREE THAT EDUCATION AND
ENFORCEMENT PLAY A ROLE, IT
REALLY FELT LIKE AN ABDICATION
OF RESPONSIBILITY.
WE ALL KNOW THE RULES OF THE
ROAD.
YOU AREN'T GOING TO EDUCATE
PEOPLE INTO COMPLIANCE.
MANY PEOPLE IN OUR COMMUNITY
DON'T UNDERSTAND OR OUTRIGHT
HOSTILE TOWARD VISION ZERO
THOUGH AND I THINK THAT'S WHERE
EDUCATION COULD HELP FOCUS ON
BUILDING TRUST IN UNDERSTAND
LOVE AND SUPPORT FOR VISION
ZERO.
WE NEED YOU TO SELL IT.
WE SHOULD DO TARGETED
ENFORCEMENT LIKE THE CROSSWHITE
CAMPAIGN WE HAD A FEW YEARS
AGO.
BUT WITHOUT THE SUSTAINED
EFFORT PEOPLE INEVITABLY FALL
BACK INTO THEIR OLD HABITS.
I THINK WE ALL THIS BODY THE
COMMUNITY CITY STAFF LACK
ALIGNMENT ON SOME BASIC
PRINCIPLES OF VISION ZERO AND
SAFE SYSTEMS NAMELY TRAFFIC
DEATHS AND SERIOUS INJURIES ARE
UNACCEPTABLE AND PREVENTABLE
PEOPLE OUTSIDE OF CARS ARE
VULNERABLE AND CRASHES ARE
INEVITABLE BECAUSE PEOPLE MAKE
MISTAKES.
ULTIMATELY THIS FALLS APART
UNLESS YOU INSIST THAT OUR
ENGINEERS DESIGN SAFETY FIRST,
NO AMOUNT OF EDUCATION OR
ENFORCEMENT WILL SUBSTITUTE FOR
SAFE DESIGN.
WE KNOW HOW TO BUILD SAFE
ROADS.
OTHER CITIES HAVE ACHIEVED THIS
THE USDOT SAFE SYSTEM APPROACH
AS WELL AS AN ECHO IN THE
VISION ZERO NETWORK OF WHICH WE
ARE A MEMBER CITY PROVIDE
GUIDELINES ON HOW WE CAN DO SO.
THIS IS NOT PIE IN THE SKY
IDEALISM.
THESE ARE MAINSTREAM
ORGANIZATIONS PROVIDING
ACTIONABLE POLICY AND DESIGN
GUIDANCE.
I'M GLAD TO SEE PROJECTS LIKE
THE MILLER BIKEWAY AND THE NEW
CONFIGURATION ON STATE STREET.
THESE WILL ABSOLUTELY IMPROVE
SAFETY AND SHOW THAT WE CAN IN
FACT USE ENGINEERING TO SAVE
LIVES.
YET IN PROJECTS LIKE THE
ROADWAY SIZING WE ARE STILL
ASKING HOW MUCH CONGESTION WE
ARE WILLING TO ACCEPT IN
EXCHANGE FOR SAFETY WE NEED TO
SLOW CARS DOWN TO A SAFE SPEED
WHEREVER THEY INTERACT WITH
PEDESTRIANS PERIOD.
DON'T TRADE WEIGH OUR SAFETY.
YOUR RESPONSIBILITY AS
POLICYMAKERS TO IS TO ENSURE
THAT EVERY SINGLE TIME THE CITY
MAKES CHANGES ON OUR ROADS WE
ARE DESIGNING AND BUILDING
THOSE ROADS TO BE SAFE.
PLEASE MAKE POLICY AND EVALUATE
STAFF WITH THAT IN MIND THIS IS
A SERIOUS PROBLEM AND WE NEED
YOU TO ACT SAFETY CAN'T WAIT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS PAUL CUTCO
.
I WAS EXPECTING THIS PERSON TO
BE HEARD.
I DON'T SEE HIM ON LINE
.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS JEFF HAYNER
PAINTER.
IF YOU'RE ONLINE YOU PRESS STAR
SIX TO RAISE YOUR HAND
.
I DON'T SEE THIS CALLER ON
ONLINE
.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS RYAN
HOUSEKEEPER RYAN HOUSEKEEPER
.
>> THE SPEAKER WAS ALSO
SUPPOSED TO BE IN PERSON.
HE'S NOT ONLINE
.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS JEREMY
HAYLIE
.
GOOD EVENING, EVERYONE.
CHAIRMAN HALEY TOUCHER HOPE
EVERYBODY HAD A THANKSGIVING.
>> I WOULD JUST LIKE TO REMIND
YOU AND OURSELVES YOU'RE
LOOKING AT PAUL THE BOND FOR
140 MILLION.
I'D LIKE TO ALSO THINK ABOUT
WHAT OTHER ENTITIES ANN ARBOR
JUST RECENTLY HAS VOTED ON TO
HAVE A BOND.
PAUL WAS THE SCHOOL'S I GUESS
SOMEWHERE OVER TWO HUNDRED
MILLION DOLLARS AND IF THAT
WERE TO ADD TO I'M JUST LOOKING
AT THE TOTAL COMBINATION
BECAUSE IF YOU GUYS MAKE THIS
DECISION THEY'RE MAKING THAT
DECISION.
IT ALL AFFECTS THE VOTERS.
IN THE END HE CAN JUST DIVIDE
THAT TOTAL AMOUNT AND THE TOTAL
NUMBER OF HOUSEHOLDS AND THAT'S
HOW MUCH IS GOING TO BE PUT ON
EACH HOUSEHOLD IF BOTH BONDS
ARE POLLED.
IT'S AN IMPORTANT THING TO
CONSIDER AND AS WELL AS THE
LAND THAT THE PARKING STRUCTURE
AND OUR HOUSING COMPLEX IS
GOING TO BE ON, IS THAT LAND
GOING TO BE GIVEN TO THE CITY
FOR THE PARKING STRUCTURE?
WHERE DOES IT LAND GOING TO BE
GIVEN TO ANN ARBOR HOUSING
COMPLEX OR IS THE DEVELOPER
JUST GOING TO BE PAYING TAXES
ON THE WHOLE THING AS YOU'RE
STRUCTURE BEING RUN BY THE CITY
IS GOING TO BE SITTING GETTING
PARKING THE INCOME WHILE TIF IS
BEING GENERATED UNDERNEATH THAT
AND I JUST CAN'T UNDERSTAND IT
.
AND ANOTHER THING I CAN'T
UNDERSTAND IS WHY A DEVELOPER
IF HE'S GOING TO DO SUCH A
THING NOT JUST GIVE THE LAND TO
THE CITY FOR THE PROPERTY AND
FOR THAT OUR HOUSING STRUCTURE
BECAUSE IT PUTS HIM AT A
LIABILITY FOR A LAWSUIT FOR
LEGAL POSSIBILITY BECAUSE
THERE'S SOMETHING TO HAPPEN.
THEY CAN NOW SUE THE WHOEVER
UNDERSTRUCTURE AND THE PERSON
WHO OWNS THE PROPERTY BECAUSE
THAT'S ONE THING IF YOU GET IN
A CAR ACCIDENT WHICH I RECENTLY
DID AND ASK CERTAIN QUESTIONS
AND ONE QUESTIONS ASKED WAS WAS
THERE ANY TITLING ON THE CAR
ADVERTISING AND ANY COMPANY AND
IF THAT CAR'S RENTED OWNED BY
RENTED BY THE COMPANY AND
RENTED THROUGH THE COMPANY IF
YOU WERE TO GET HIT YOU CAN SUE
BOTH THE COMPANY AND THE RENTAL
COMPANY FOR THE ACCIDENT.
I'M JUST SAYING THAT WORK HERE
IN THE SAME OWNER DEVELOPER
OWNS THE LAND AND CITY SAYING
THANK YOU FOR OUR NEXT SPEAKER
IS MARGARET MACALL
MARGARET
MCCALL.
WELL NUMBER TWO FOUR ZERO YOU
CAN GO AHEAD
.
GO AHEAD.
MY NAME IS MARGARET
ACALL.
I AM CALLING IN TODAY TO
EXPRESS MY CONVICTION THAT CITY
COUNCIL NEEDS TO REFOCUS ON
VISION ZERO AND ITS ACTIVE ROLE
IN PREVENTING TRAFFIC
FATALITIES AND SERIOUS INJURIES
AND PURSUANT TO THAT GOAL TO
ENSURE THAT THE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS THAT WAS
ALLOCATED FOR QUICKSILVER ROAD
SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS GOES
THROUGH EXACTLY THAT RATHER
THAN TO A BIKE LANE ON
CATHERINE STREET.
>> SO I WAS EXTREMELY
DISAPPOINTED TO HEAR THE
COMMENTS FROM CITY COUNCIL AS
ADAM REFERENCE THAT REITERATES
THE MYTH THAT MOST CRASHES ARE
ONLY CAUSED BY INDIVIDUAL
BEHAVIOR.
THERE'S NOTHING THAT
INFRASTRUCTURE CAN DO ABOUT
THAT.
THIS IS PATENTLY UNTRUE.
SPEED KILLS AND ROAD DESIGN CAN
MEANINGFULLY REDUCE SPEED SO
THAT EVEN HUMAN ERROR DOESN'T
HAVE TO RESULT IN THE DEATHS
OF WALKERS AND BIKERS WHEN A
CAR STRIKES A PEDESTRIAN
TRAVELING TWENTY MILES AN HOUR
IT RESULTS IN DEATH OR SERIOUS
INJURY ONLY 13 PERCENT OF THE
TIME COMPARED TO SEVENTY THREE
PERCENT IF THE CAR IS TRAVELING
AT FORTY MILES AN HOUR.
>> WE KNOW IN ANN ARBOR WE HAVE
SOLUTIONS THAT ACTUALLY WORK TO
REDUCE SPEED AND TO HELP PEOPLE
STOP FOR PEDESTRIANS THERE THE
SOUTH MAIN ROAD DIET LED TO A
SEVEN FOLD REDUCTION IN PEOPLE
EXCESSIVELY SPEEDING AND
ANOTHER EXAMPLE THAT REALLY
BLEW ME AWAY WAS THE DETROIT
AND FIFTH RECONFIGURATIONS
BEFORE THAT PROJECT LESS AND
HALF OF DRIVERS STOPPED FOR
PEDESTRIANS AT THAT
INTERSECTION AND AFTER IT WAS
ALMOST 100 PERCENT.
>> SO WE HAVE SOLUTIONS THAT
WORK BUT WE NEED TO APPLY THEM
MORE WIDELY.
I'M THINKING OF A STREET NEAR
MY OWN HOUSE PACKARD HEADING
EAST TOWARDS NC WHERE THE ROAD
IS DESIGNED LIKE CARS SHOULD BE
TRAVELING 50 MILES AN HOUR AND
MANY DRIVERS DO.
A FRIEND OF MINE IN MY
NEIGHBORHOOD IS AN ACCOMPLISHED
BIKER WITH A SIX YEAR OLD SON
AND HE WAS ASKING OUR FRIEND
FOR ADVICE.
HER SON WANTED TO BUY THE AC
BUT WAS GOING TO HAVE TO TAKE
PACARD AND HE'S A RESPONSIBLE
KID AND A GOOD BIKER.
BUT PACARD IS SO DANGEROUS
SHOULD SHE LET HIM GO?
WHAT'S YOUR QUESTION?
ULTIMATELY SHE DID HE MADE IT
WITHOUT INCIDENT BUT THIS
REALLY WAS HEART WRENCHING FOR
ME.
I JUST I DON'T WANT TO LIVE IN
A TOWN WHERE YOU CAN'T FEEL
SAFE EXPLORING WITHOUT BEING
BEHIND THE WHEEL OF AN SUV.
RIGHT.
AND ULTIMATELY IT'S ABOUT THE
DEATHS AND THE SERIOUS INJURIES
BUT IT'S ALSO ABOUT ELIMINATING
THE NEAR MISSES, THE FEELING
OF NERVOUSNESS STEPPING OUT
INTO THE STREET AND THE FEELING
THAT YOU SHOULD PROBABLY CHOOSE
TO DRIVE JUST BECAUSE IT'S
SAFER.
SO IN CONCLUSION WE ALLOCATED
FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS A
REALLY MEANINGFUL AMOUNT FOR
QUICK BUILD SAFETY PROJECTS TO
TAKE RAPID ACTION TO MAKE MAJOR
STREETS SAFER IN OUR TOWN.
THE CITY NEEDS TO OWN THAT
COMMITMENT AND BELIEVE THAT IT
CAN WORK AND PUT EVERY SINGLE
DOLLAR TOWARDS INFRASTRUCTURE
PROJECTS THAT MAKE A
DIFFERENCE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS JESSICA
URINETOWN COUNCIL AND THANK YOU
FOR THE OPPORTUNITY TO SPEAK
TODAY.
>> MY NAME IS GLADYS AND I LIVE
IN THE FIRST WARD.
IT'S BEEN A DECADE SINCE THIS
COUNCIL PASSED A COMMITMENT TO
ACHIEVE VISION ZERO BY TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE AND FOUR AND A HALF
YEARS SINCE THE ADOPTION OF THE
COMPREHENSIVE TRANSPORTATION
PLAN NOT TO MENTION COUNTLESS
OTHER PLANS AND RESOLUTIONS.
THAT'S WHY IT'S EXTREMELY
CONCERNING TO SEE THAT THE VERY
PEOPLE WHO ARE SUPPOSED TO BE
FIXING THIS PROBLEM APPEAR TO
BE STILL FALLING FOR OUTDATED
AND DISCREDITED TROPES SUCH AS
PROPOSING DRIVER EDUCATION
CAMPAIGNS AS AN ALTERNATIVE TO
SAFER INFRASTRUCTURE DESIGN
PUBLISHING SURVEYS THAT FRAME
THE ISSUE AS A TRADEOFF BETWEEN
SAFETY AND CONVENIENCE AND
TAKING MULTIPLE YEARS TO
IMPLEMENT SO-CALLED QUICK BUILD
IMPROVEMENTS IN NO OTHER FIELD
OF ENGINEERING WITH THIS LEVEL
OF RESIGNATION ON MITIGATE AND
MITIGATING KNOWN HAZARDS BE
ANYWHERE NEAR ACCEPTABLE ANY
FACTORY, AIRLINE OR AMUSEMENT
PARK THAT CAUSE OF THIS MANY
FATALITIES AND INJURIES WOULD
BE IMMEDIATELY SHUT DOWN.
WE HAVE AN EPIDEMIC OF TRAFFIC
VIOLENCE AND THIS CITY
ADMINISTRATION IS CURRENTLY
OFFERING LITTLE MORE THAN
THOUGHTS AND PRAYERS HOW MANY
MORE PREVENTABLE DEATHS AND
SERIOUS INJURIES ARE YOU
WILLING TO COUNTENANCE IN THE
NAME OF CONTINUING BUSINESS AS
USUAL?
THE DRAFT LAND USE PLAN
ENVISIONS WELCOMING SIGNIFICANT
NUMBERS OF NEW RESIDENTS AND
BUSINESSES ALONG MANY OF THE
STREETS THAT WERE TRANSFORMED
TO HIGH SPEED STREETS IN THE
NIGHT IN THE NINETEEN FIFTIES
AND SIXTIES.
IS IT EQUITABLE TO DUMP
FAMILIES THAT DESPERATELY WANT
TO LIVE IN THE CITY DO THESE
DANGEROUS AND POLLUTED STREETS
JUST BECAUSE A HANDFUL
OF WANNABE NASCAR DRIVERS
BELIEVE THAT BEING ABLE TO
ACCELERATE TO HIGHWAY SPEEDS
THE SECOND THEY LEAVE THEIR
DRIVEWAY IS SOMEHOW THEIR
BIRTHRIGHT OR ARE YOU WILLING
TO COMMIT FUNDING AND
UNEQUIVOCALLY DIRECT THE
ADMINISTRATOR AND STAFF TO
ACTUALLY START REMEDIATING ALL
OF THESE STREETS TO BRING BACK
VIBRANT AND WELCOMING
STREETSCAPES THAT PRIORITIZE
SAFETY AND EASY ACCESS TO
EFFICIENT TRANSIT CITYWIDE
OTHER CITIES AROUND THE WORLD
HAVE SUCCEEDED.
THESE ARE NOT MYSTERIOUS OR
FANCIFUL IDEAS.
IT DOESN'T HAVE TO BE PERFECT
ON THE FIRST TRY.
THE MOST IMPORTANT THING IS TO
START NOW AND PLASTIC BOLLARDS
GOING TO BE INSTALLED IN TIME
FRAMES OF WEEKS NOT YEARS AND
LONGER TERM CAPITAL PLANS CAN
INCORPORATE MORE PERMANENT AND
DURABLE INFRASTRUCTURE
IMPROVEMENTS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS BESTIVAL
GOOD EVENING COUNCIL CARQUEST
WESTFALL THIRTY FIVE VOTE FIVE
CHARTER PLACE.
YOU WERE SENT A PROPOSED
RESOLUTION CALLED RESOLUTION TO
REQUIRE SAFE SPEED STREET
DESIGNS THAT WE HOPE YOU WILL
TAKE UP IN WHOLE OR IN PART
TONIGHT AND IF NOT TONIGHT AND
IN TWO WEEKS MANY OF US WERE
HOPEFUL THAT YOU WOULD HAVE A
RESPONSE TO THE DANGEROUS AND
OUT OF TOUCH RHETORIC YOU SAW
FROM TOOL DESIGN IN SEPTEMBER
RHETORIC THAT IGNORED YOUR
ADOPTED VISION ZERO POLICY.
SINCE THAT TIME WE'VE HAD STAFF
ISSUE AN INFORMAL SURVEY THAT
RELITIGATE SUFFICIENT ZERO AND
FRAMES THE ROAD RIGHT SIZING
INITIATIVE AS A KALEEN VERSUS
BIKE LANE CONFLICT.
THEN MANY OF US HEARD ABOUT
PROPOSAL TO USE THE QUICK BUILD
MONEY SOMETHING WE ALL FOUGHT
SO HARD FOR IN A WAY THAT
DOESN'T COME CLOSE TO WHAT THE
BUDGET RESOLUTION ASKED FOR.
BUT PERHAPS THE MOST TROUBLING
WAS THE STAFF PRESENTATION AT
THE LAST TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION MEETING WHICH
REVEALED THE PHILOSOPHY TOWARD
SAFETY THAT WARRANTS AN
IMMEDIATE AND STRONG RESPONSE
AT A MINIMUM A RETRACTION
OF SEVERAL STATEMENTS WE
OUTLINED IN THE RESOLUTION THE
RESOLUTION YOU HAVE IN FRONT
OF YOU IS SPECIFIC ABOUT THE
NEED TO HAVE 20 MILE PER HOUR
MAXIMUM FASTEST PATH SPEED AT
CONFLICT POINTS BECAUSE A CORE
TENET OF VISION ZERO IS THAT
MISTAKES SHOULDN'T BE DEADLY.
THESE SPEEDS HAD THESE SPEEDS
HAVE BEEN ACHIEVED AT MANY
INTERSECTIONS IN THE CITY AND
THIS PRACTICE MUST BE APPLIED
TO ANY ROAD UNDERGOING
MAINTENANCE OR REDESIGN.
PUT ANOTHER WAY NO DESIGNS
COMING OUT OF STAFF OR
CONSULTANTS SHOULD SHOW AN
UNSAFE SPEED OR ELSE IT'S NOT
VISION ZERO.
THE RESOLUTION REQUIRES A
RESHAPING OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT.
THE PUBLIC SHOULD BE ENGAGED
ABOUT HOW A PILOT SAFETY DESIGN
PERFORMS AFTER INSTALLATION NOT
BEFORE TO DETERMINE IF YOU
THINK THEY'LL LIKE IT, I WANT
TO REMIND YOU THAT IN TWENTY
EIGHTEEN A STATISTICALLY VALID
POLL DEMONSTRATED THAT SEVENTY
ONE PERCENT OF ANN HARBOR
RESIDENTS WERE WILLING TO
ENDURE 30 TO 60 PERCENT DELAY
ON A TEN MINUTE DRIVE IN ORDER
TO IMPROVE ROAD SAFETY.
THIS IS ABOUT SAFETY AND THE
COMMUNITY OVERWHELMINGLY
SUPPORTS IT WHEN YOU
APPROPRIATELY FRAME POLICY IN
TERMS OF SAFETY AND YOU CAN
DEMONSTRATE SAFETY
IMPROVEMENTS, THE LOSS OF A
NEIGHBOR IS NO DIFFERENT
WHETHER IT COMES FROM ACTION OR
INACTION ON THE PART OF THE
CITY, BOTH ARE UNACCEPTABLE.
BOTH ARE ANOTHER EMPTY CHAIR AT
A FAMILY'S DINNER TABLE.
MANY CITIES HAVE SOLVED THIS.
WE BELIEVE WE ARE SHARING A
PLAN TO SETTING AN APPROPRIATE
COURSE FOR THE CITY.
I CAN'T RECALL AN ISSUE OVER
THE PAST TWENTY YEARS WHERE
CITY COUNCIL HAS HAD TO ISSUE
REPEATED RESOLUTIONS AND GET SO
LITTLE OR NO RESULTS OR EVEN A
FORMAL RESPONSE SOMETHING HAS
TO GIVE PLEASE ACT NOW.
>> THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS PETER
HALCON, HIGH COUNCIL MEMBERS
AND ADMINISTRATOR HONI AND
PETER.
I'M ON THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION BUT TONIGHT I'M
SPEAKING JUST FOR MYSELF.
ON NOVEMBER 19 STAFF GAVE THEIR
ANNUAL SAFETY UPDATE TO THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION.
I SHARED MY DISAPPOINTMENT IN
THAT PRESENTATION BUT I WANT
YOU TO HEAR IT AS WELL.
THAT PRESENTATION CLEARLY
INDICATES THAT STAFF ARE NOT
ALIGNED WITH THE VISION ZERO
GOAL THAT YOU HAVE GIVEN AND
MANY TIMES WE HEARD THAT
NOTHING CAN BE DONE TO STOP
PEOPLE FROM GOING 80 IN A 35
ZONE.
WE HEARD THAT NOTHING CAN BE
DONE TO STOP PEOPLE FROM GOING
THROUGH INTERSECTIONS.
WE HEARD THAT HUMAN BEHAVIOR IS
THE DECIDING FACTOR IN THE
WORST CRASHES AND MOST
ALARMINGLY WE HEARD THAT THE
DIFFICULT TRUTH IS THAT
ENGINEERING CAN ONLY INFLUENCE
PEOPLE WHO ARE BEHAVING WITHIN
THE BOUNDS OF NORMAL
EXPECTATION.
THAT'S A QUOTE I DISAGREE WITH
THE ASSERTION THAT ENGINEERING
AND DESIGN HAVE LIMITED
INFLUENCE ON BEHAVIOR.
A BASIC PREMISE OF VISION ZERO
IS THAT WE CAN AND MUST AFFECT
HUMAN BEHAVIOR BOTH EXPECTED
AND UNEXPECTED THROUGH THE
DESIGN OF OUR STREETS FURTHER
AND ARE VERY SIMPLY NOWHERE
NEAR REACHING THE LIMITS OF THE
POSITIVE CHANGE WE CAN REALIZE
THROUGH IMPROVED STREET DESIGN
IF WE WANT TO STOP 80 MILE PER
HOUR DRIVERS OF TRANSPORTATION
PLAN LISTS THIRTEEN DIFFERENT
ENGINEERING STRATEGIES FOR
ADDRESSING SPEEDING AND SLOWING
TRAFFIC WILL HELP PREVENT
DRIVERS FROM BLOWING THROUGH
INTERSECTIONS SINCE PEOPLE ARE
FAR MORE LIKELY TO YIELD WHEN
THEY ARE AT SLOWER SPEEDS.
BUT ACCORDING TO THAT
PRESENTATION WE RECEIVE,
THERE'S NOTHING WE CAN DO ABOUT
IT.
SO WITH FATAL AND SERIOUS
CRASHES RISING ESPECIALLY AMONG
PEDESTRIANS, WHAT WE GOT ON
NOVEMBER 1 WAS AN ABDICATION
OF RESPONSIBILITY TO MAKE
STREETS SAFER THROUGH
ENGINEERING AND DESIGN AND I
DON'T AGREE WITH THERE'S A LOT
TO BE DONE HERE AND THAT'S
GOOD.
I WOULD RATHER HAVE A LONG TO
DO LIST THAN JUST STAND BY
THINKING THAT NOTHING CAN BE
DONE TO FIX THIS PROBLEM.
THIS TO DO LIST CONTAINS
CATEGORIES LIKE GETTING ROADWAY
RIGHT SIZING RIGHT THE TRUNK
TRANSFER MAJOR STREETS TRAFFIC
CALMING AND QUICK BUILD FIXES
CRASH LOCATIONS.
THESE ARE THE TYPES
OF INITIATIVES AND PROJECTS
ENGINEERING STAFF SHOULD BE
ASKING FOR OUR SUPPORT ON NOT
SPEED CAMERAS AND MEDIA
CAMPAIGNS BUT THE VERY FIRST
THING THAT NEEDS TO BE ON THAT
TO DO LIST IS GETTING
LEADERSHIP AND STAFF ALIGNED ON
THEIR ROLE IN IMPROVING SAFETY
ON OUR
STREETS BY PLANNING,
BUDGETING AND ENGINEERING
IMPROVED STREET DESIGNS.
COUNCIL MEMBERS PLEASE ASK
STAFF TO RETRACT THE NOVEMBER
19TH PRESENTATION.
THEY CAN BRING IT BACK WHEN IT
ALIGNS THE VISION ZERO WHEN IT
DESCRIBES THEIR ENGINEERING
PLAN TO CURTAIL THE ALARMING
RISE IN SERIOUS AND FATAL
CRASHES AND WHEN IT CONTAINS
APPROPRIATE REQUESTS FOR THE
HELP THEY NEED TO ACCOMPLISH A
MEANINGFUL TO DO LIST.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ADAM
GOODMAN.
ADAM GOODWIN JOINING US ON
MASOOM.
ADAM GOODMAN, GO AHEAD
.
ADAM GOODMAN, CRESTAR TO YOUR
PHONE AND YOU HEAR ME?
>> YES.
YES WE CAN.
GOOD.
HI, THIS IS ADAM GOODMAN.
I'M ALSO SPEAKING TO YOU
TONIGHT PARTLY IN RESPONSE TO
THAT PRESS REPORTING
PRESENTATION ON THE 19TH AND I
REALIZE IT'S A BIT
EXTRAORDINARY TO COME TO
COUNCIL TO RAISE OBJECTIONS TO
A STAFF PRESENTATION AT A
COMMISSION MEETING LIKE THIS.
AND I DON'T DO THIS LIGHTLY.
I DON'T THINK ANY OF US DO THIS
LIGHTLY.
PETE COVERED THE PROBLEMS IN
MORE DETAIL BUT I NEED TO BE
CLEAR ON THE MAIN POINT.
WHAT MANY OF US HEARD IN THAT
PRESENTATION WAS NOTHING LESS
THAN A WHOLESALE REJECTION
OF THE CORE PRINCIPLES THAT
UNDERGIRD VISION THEORY
OF UNSAFE SYSTEMS.
WE HEARD AN APPLICATION
OF RESPONSIBILITY AND A
REVERSION TO THE DEBUNKED IDEA
THAT IF WE CAN JUST CONVINCE
HUMANS TO STOP MAKING ERRORS
OF THIRD DECISIONS, THAT'S HOW
WE MAKE OUR ROADS SAFE.
THAT'S THE STRATEGY OUR COUNTRY
HAS TRIED IT FOR THE BETTER
PART OF A CENTURY AND IT'S
NEVER WORKED.
SO IT WAS ASTONISHING AND
DISTURBING TO HEAR THIS TROPE
REPEATED IN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
BY THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR.
BUT I ALSO WANT TO TALK ABOUT
BLACKBELT.
YOU WILL PROBABLY RECALL THAT
ABOUT SIX MONTHS AGO I BROUGHT
YOU A PETITION TO FUND A QUICK
BUILD SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS ON
MULTIGRAIN CORRIDORS WITH
STADIUM IS OUR PROPOSED TARGET
AND COUNCIL.
THANK YOU.
YOU DID APPROVE A BUDGET
AMENDMENT TO COMMIT 500000
DOLLARS FUNDING TO DO THIS AT
THE TIME I TRIED TO CONVEY THAT
WE HAD THE WE WE WOULD BE OPEN
TO OTHER IDEAS OF THE OTHER
CORRIDORS IN THE STADIUM.
WE HAD JUST SEEN SOME VERY
SERIOUS CRASHES HAPPEN ON
PACARD FOR EXAMPLE.
BUT I GUESS THAT OPENNESS WAS
ALSO A MISTAKE ON MY ON OUR
PART BECAUSE NOW WE'VE BEEN
INFORMED THAT THE PLAN FOR
THESE FUNDS IS TO EXTEND TO THE
CAPTAIN CYCLE TRIP EAST FROM
DIVISION TO CLUB AND SINCE I'M
THE ONE WE TO DO THAT PETITION
I THINK I CAN SAY WITH SOME
AUTHORITY THIS IS NOT AT ALL
WHAT WE HAD IN MIND AND I DON'T
THINK IT'S WHAT YOU HAD IN MIND
EITHER THAT BUDGET AMENDMENT
HAD HAS COST IS TALKING ABOUT
MOSTLY IN CORRIDORS IN MAJOR
STREETS AND CATHERINE IS IS
DEFINITELY OUT OF MULTIVALENT
ROAD AND IF IT COUNTS AS A
MAJOR STREET IN SOME TECHNICAL
DEFINITION THAT'S A
TECHNICALITY.
IT DOESN'T LOOK OR ACT LIKE
WHAT ANY OF US WOULD CALL A
MAJOR STREET.
SO LET ME GIVE YOU WHAT WOULD
BE AN ALTERNATE POSSIBILITY ON
FEBRUARY 6TH THIS YEAR A
PEDESTRIAN WAS SERIOUSLY
INJURED IN A CROSSWALK AT GREEN
IN BURBANK.
THIS IS AN UNCONTROLLED
CROSSWALK ACROSS FIVE LANES
OF TRAFFIC NOW BACK IN TWENTY
NINETEEN STAFF HAD PROPOSED
LANE RECONFIGURATION ON GREEN
ROAD ULTIMATELY REJECTED BY
CITY COUNCIL AT THE TIME AND A
HIGHLY POLITICIZED VOTE
RECONFIGURATION BEEN DONE.
THIS CROSSWALK WOULD HAVE BEEN
LESS DANGEROUS.
SO IF YOU WERE WORKING FOR
SHOVEL READY PROJECTS TO DO
QUICKLY WELL THE DESIGNS FOR
THIS WERE ALREADY DONE.
I THINK IT COULD HAVE JUST CUT
IT AND IF YOU'RE BEING TOLD
THAT WE CAN'T THEN YOU NEED TO
ASK FOLLOW UP QUESTIONS.
WHY DO WE NEED MORE FUNDING
OTHER RESOLUTIONS OR ORDINANCES
NEEDED TO ENABLE THIS KIND
OF WORK?
ARE THERE ISSUES WITH STATE AND
FEDERAL POLICY?
HOW IF SO HOW CAN WE APPLY FOR
EXCEPTIONS?
OTHER CITIES IN THE U.S. HAVE
FIGURED OUT HOW TO DO
QUICKPARTS WITHOUT YEARS UPON
YEARS OF PLANNING.
SO WHY CAN'T WE THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS RACHEL
COULIS.
RACHEL POUILLY
MAYOR.
THIS COLOR WAS EXPECTED IN
PERSON AND I DON'T SEE YOUR
ONLINE
.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS BLAINE
COLEMAN.
HOW WOULD YOU FEEL IF YOUR
CHILDREN WERE BEING BOMBED TO
DEATH BY ISRAEL EN MASSE?
THOUSANDS AND THOUSANDS
OF THEM?
>> WELL, VIEW PALESTINIAN
CHILDREN AS HUMAN BEINGS SO I
GUESS THAT QUESTION IS NOT
RESONATING WITH YOU IF YOU
VIEWED PALESTINIAN CHILDREN AS
FULLY HUMAN BEINGS LIKE YOUR
OWN CHILDREN, MAYBE YOU WOULD
GET CONCERNED ENOUGH TO PASS
THIS RESOLUTION THAT SAYS WE
ARE AGAINST MILITARY AID TOO.
>> ISRAEL RIGHT HERE THREE
SEVEN WORDS WE ARE AGAINST
MILITARY AID TO ISRAEL NOW FROM
JANUARY NINETEEN EIGHTY FOUR
UNTIL NOW THAT'S ALMOST FORTY
TWO YEARS THIS CITY COUNCIL HAS
DONE EVERYTHING IN ITS POWER TO
SMOTHER AND STONEWALL ANY
RESOLUTION AGAINST AID TO
ISRAEL.
YOU CAN READ ABOUT IT ON THE
FRONT PAGE OF THE ANN ARBOR
NEWS JANUARY 10TH NINETEEN
EIGHTY FOUR AND YOU CAN READ
ABOUT IT AND MANY MANY ISSUES
OF ANN ARBOR NEWS AND EMILY
FROM THEN UNTIL NOW IF THIS
CITY COUNCIL VIEWED
PALESTINIANS AS HUMAN BEINGS IT
WOULD ACT VERY DIFFERENTLY NOW
I'VE SEEN A LOT OF FAT COMES
THROUGH THIS ROOM AND THE
TWENTY PLUS YEARS THAT I'VE
BEEN ASKING FOR A RESOLUTION
AGAINST MILITARY AID TO ISRAEL,
I'VE SEEN A LOT OF FADS.
I'VE SEEN PEOPLE FILL THIS ROOM
PRETENDING TO BE REALLY UPSET.
>> THE DEER WERE BEING KILLED
IN ANN ARBOR.
I'VE SEEN PEOPLE IN THIS ROOM
REALLY UPSET THAT ANN ARBOR WAS
NOT ENERGY EFFICIENT.
>> I'VE SEEN PEOPLE IN THIS
ROOM REALLY UPSET THE TWO
PEDESTRIANS WERE KILLED IN
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE IN ANN ARBOR
SO UPSET THAT THEY MIGHT COME
BACK A FEW MORE TIMES AND THEN
THEY'LL STOP.
>> BUT THESE PEOPLE ALL CARED
NOTHING AND SAID NOTHING ABOUT
THE GENOCIDE THAT ISRAEL IS
COMMITTING AGAINST THE
PALESTINIAN PEOPLE AND THIS
CITY COUNCIL UP UNTIL NOW ALSO
IS CARRYING NOTHING AND SAYING
NOTHING ABOUT THE GENOCIDE THAT
ISRAEL IS COMMITTING AGAINST
THE PALESTINIAN PEOPLE WITH
YOUR TAX DOLLARS AND YOUR
POLITICAL SUPPORT THAT NEEDS TO
STOP DON'T YOU THINK?
>> THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS MARK
SCHERBA
.
>> SHAMELESS.
NOW MARK SCARBRO TWENTY
SEVENTEEN FAIR STREET COUNSEL.
A MONTH AGO I ASKED YOU TO STOP
MAKING PLANS ABOUT
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY AND START
IMPLEMENTING SAFETY FIXES.
I DIDN'T REALIZE THAT MOMENT
THAT THERE'S AN EVEN BIGGER
PROBLEM PREVENTING US FROM
ACHIEVING VISION ZERO IN THIS
MONTH'S TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION MEETING STAFF HAD A
PRE WRITTEN SCRIPT EXPLICITLY
ABDICATING RESPONSIBILITY FOR
CREATING A SAFE TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEM.
STAFF ARE TELLING US THAT
THERE'S NOTHING THEY CAN DO
ABOUT A DRIVER CHOOSING TO GO
80 MILES PER HOUR.
DON JACKSON BUT THAT'S JUST
PLAIN FALSE.
>> I DON'T SEE PEOPLE DRIVING
80 MILES PER HOUR DOWN BY
TWENTY FIVE FOOT WIDE STREET
WITH PARKING ON BOTH SIDES.
WHAT'S THE DIFFERENCE?
IT'S THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT.
HOW FAST DO PEOPLE DRIVE ON
MAIN STREET NORTH OF DPO?
WHY DO THEY DRIVE SLOWER ON
THAT SAME MAIN STREET BETWEEN
WASHINGTON AND WILLIAM?
IT'S THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT IN
TWENTY TWENTY ONE S MAIN WAS
RECONFIGURED AND SAW SEVEN
TIMES REDUCTION IN EXCESSIVE
SPEEDING.
OUR TRANSPORTATION STAFF CHANGE
THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT AND IN
DOING SO CHANGE DANGEROUS
DRIVING BEHAVIOR.
THIS IS NOT GROUNDBREAKING
RESEARCH.
WE KNOW THAT PEOPLE SLOW DOWN
WHEN A CITY STREET LOOKS LESS
LIKE A HIGHWAY, WHEN A VEHICLE
IS GOING SLOWER AND A CRASH
HAPPENS WHETHER IT'S BECAUSE
THE DRIVER WAS LOOKING AT THEIR
PHONE OR BECAUSE THEY WERE
STUNG BY A BEE, THAT CRASH IS
LESS LIKELY TO KILL SOMEONE
EVER.
>> EVERYONE MAKES MISTAKES AND
OUR STREETS SHOULD ACCOMMODATE
THOSE MISTAKES WITHOUT SOMEONE
DYING.
THIS IS THE BASIC PREMISE
OF VISION ZERO STAFF SHOULD
KNOW THIS OR ELSE THEY'RE
REJECTING YOUR PREVIOUS
RESOLUTIONS COMMITTING TO
VISION ZERO.
THAT'S WHY I SENT YOU A
PROPOSED RESOLUTION TO CLEARLY
MANDATE EVERY STREET REDESIGN
BASELINE A SAFE SPEED AND FOR
STAFF TO RETRACT THEIR
STATEMENTS BLAMING HUMANS FOR
DESIGN FAILURES IN THE LAST
DECADE.
TWENTY FIVE PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
KILLED OR SERIOUSLY INJURED ON
OUR STREETS EVERY YEAR.
THAT NUMBER DOESN'T EVEN
INCLUDE PEOPLE WHO HAVE HAD
LIFE CHANGING INJURIES BECOME
APPARENT AFTER LEAVING THE
SCENE.
>> IMAGINE IF THERE ARE TWENTY
FIVE PLANE CRASHES AT THE
NEARBY AIRPORT EVERY YEAR.
WOULD YOU ACCEPT THAT AS NORMAL
AND TELL PEOPLE THAT WE HAVE TO
FOLLOW A STANDARD PROCESS FOR
CONSIDERING CHANGES OR WOULD
YOU CONSIDER IT A CRISIS
NEEDING IMMEDIATE ACTION?
>> OUR CURRENT PROCESS TO
REDESIGN A STREET TAKES FIVE
YEARS MINIMUM BY THE TIME WE
HIRE A CONSULTANT, HIRE THE
ENGINEERING TEAM, HIRE THE
CONTRACTOR AND SCHEDULE THE
WORK AND THAT TIME ONE HUNDRED
AND TWENTY FIVE MORE PEOPLE
WILL HAVE THEIR LIVES
PERMANENTLY CHANGED.
HOW MANY PEOPLE ARE IN THIS
ROOM RIGHT NOW?
WILL YOU GO TO THE FUNERAL
OF THE NEXT PEOPLE TO DIE AND
TELL THEIR FAMILIES I'M SORRY
FOR YOUR LOSS?
IT WAS IMPORTANT THAT WE
COUNTED TRAFFIC BEFORE MAKING
ANY CHANGES.
WE COULD HAVE CAUSED A BACK UP
ON THE HIGHWAY CITY COUNCIL.
YOU'RE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
SAFETY OF THIS COMMUNITY.
DO BETTER DO SOMETHING.
THANK YOU.
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS MOJGAN
SUBURBIA'S, A FUNNY
OH YEAH.
>> THE WHOLE OF THIS CITY IN AN
UPROAR ABOUT THE FACT THAT TWO
PEOPLE DIED IN ANN ARBOR IN ONE
YEAR TWO PEOPLE THAT'S LESS
THAN THE NATIONAL AVERAGE IN A
CITY THAT HAS ONE HUNDRED AND
TWENTY THREE THOUSAND
POPULATION TWO PEOPLE IS JUST
BY ACCIDENT BUT LOOK HOW THEY
ARE UP IN ARMS ABOUT IT AND
THAT'S GOOD.
I AM GLAD THEY ACTUALLY CARE
ABOUT HUMAN LIVES.
>> HOWEVER, I WANT TO BRING
YOUR ATTENTION TO THE FACT THAT
IN THAT ONE YEAR THAT TWO
PEOPLE GOT RUN OVER PEDESTRIAN
ACCIDENT IN ANN ARBOR PROBABLY
MORE THAN ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND
PEOPLE DIED IN GAZA AND THEY
DIDN'T JUST DIE.
THEY WERE BOMBED TO DEATH BY
ISRAEL, A GREAT FRIEND OF THE
UNITED STATES THAT IS
CONDUCTING GENOCIDE THAT HAS
CAUSED HUNDREDS AND THOUSANDS
OF DEATHS IN GAZA ALONE, NOT TO
MENTION WHAT'S HAPPENING IN
LEBANON, NOT TO MENTION WHAT'S
HAPPENING IN SYRIA, NOT TO
MENTION WHAT'S HAPPENING IN
YEMEN.
THE UNITED STATES IS THE DEVIL
IN THE EYES OF THE WORLD.
AND UNITED STATES POLITICIANS
THE UNITED STATES IS THE DEVIL
THAT ALLOW THIS GENOCIDE AND
AND UNITED STATES POLITICIANS
MULTIPLE OTHER ONES LIKE IT TO
THAT ALLOW THIS GENOCIDE AND
GO ON AND NOT JUST ALLOW IT BUT
MULTIPLE OTHER ONES LIKE IT TO
FUNDED HELP IT GAVE IT SUPPORT.
GO ON AND NOT JUST ALLOW IT BUT
>> THEY ARE WORSE THAN THE
FUNDED HELP IT GAVE IT SUPPORT.
DEVIL AND OUR CITY COUNCIL HAS
>> THEY ARE WORSE THAN THE
HAD MULTIPLE OPPORTUNITIES TO
DEVIL AND OUR CITY COUNCIL HAS
PASS A RESOLUTION TO AT LEAST
HAD MULTIPLE OPPORTUNITIES TO
PRETEND THEY CARE ABOUT HUMAN
PASS A RESOLUTION TO AT LEAST
LIVES IN GAZA.
PRETEND THEY CARE ABOUT HUMAN
THEY HAVE PASSED ALL OF THOSE
LIVES IN GAZA.
BY.
THEY HAVE PASSED ALL OF THOSE
>> THEY HAVE PROVEN THAT THEY
BY.
DON'T CARE ABOUT HUMAN LIVES.
>> THEY HAVE PROVEN THAT THEY
THEY JUST DON'T THERE'S ONE
DON'T CARE ABOUT HUMAN LIVES.
THING THEY REALLY CARE ABOUT
THEY JUST DON'T THERE'S ONE
AND THAT IS TO PLEASE WHOEVER
THING THEY REALLY CARE ABOUT
PUT THEM IN POWER, WHICH IS
AND THAT IS TO PLEASE WHOEVER
THEIR CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTORS,
PUT THEM IN POWER, WHICH IS
THEY GET PLENTY OF MONEY FROM
THEIR CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTORS,
THEIR CONTRIBUTORS AND
THEY GET PLENTY OF MONEY FROM
REPEATEDLY GETTING THOSE SEATS.
THEIR CONTRIBUTORS AND
AND IF YOU WALK AROUND AND TALK
REPEATEDLY GETTING THOSE SEATS.
TO PEOPLE, NOBODY LIKES THEM.
AND IF YOU WALK AROUND AND TALK
>> NOBODY WANTS THEM IN POWER.
TO PEOPLE, NOBODY LIKES THEM.
THIS IS A HUGE PROBLEM ACROSS
>> NOBODY WANTS THEM IN POWER.
THE UNITED STATES.
THIS IS A HUGE PROBLEM ACROSS
>> OUR ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES
THE UNITED STATES.
DO NOT REPRESENT US.
>> OUR ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES
THEY REPRESENT AN OLIGARCHY
DO NOT REPRESENT US.
THAT RUNS THIS COUNTRY AND IS
THEY REPRESENT AN OLIGARCHY
BUDDY BUDDY WITH ISRAEL.
THAT RUNS THIS COUNTRY AND IS
>> ISRAEL HAS GOT US IN THE
BUDDY BUDDY WITH ISRAEL.
PROBLEM ON THEIR HANDS.
>> ISRAEL HAS GOT US IN THE
>> THEY CAN DO WHATEVER THEY
PROBLEM ON THEIR HANDS.
LIKE AND YOU DON'T HAVE TO SIT
>> THEY CAN DO WHATEVER THEY
HOME AND TAKE THIS.
LIKE AND YOU DON'T HAVE TO SIT
YOU CAN COME OUT FIGHT AND MAKE
HOME AND TAKE THIS.
IT RIGHT.
YOU CAN COME OUT FIGHT AND MAKE
>> STOP THIS CHARADE.
IT RIGHT.
>> THE WORLD KNOWS THAT YOUR
>> STOP THIS CHARADE.
REPRESENTATIVES DON'T REPRESENT
>> THE WORLD KNOWS THAT YOUR
THE WORLD KNOWS THAT THE
REPRESENTATIVES DON'T REPRESENT
POPULATION IN IN THIS COUNTRY
THE WORLD KNOWS THAT THE
WANTS MEDICARE ONCE TWENTY FIVE
POPULATION IN IN THIS COUNTRY
DOLLAR MINIMUM WAGE ONCE NO
WANTS MEDICARE ONCE TWENTY FIVE
MONEY SPENT ON ISRAEL.
DOLLAR MINIMUM WAGE ONCE NO
NOBODY WANTS TO GIVE ISRAEL
MONEY SPENT ON ISRAEL.
MONEY BUT YOUR ELECTED
NOBODY WANTS TO GIVE ISRAEL
REPRESENTATIVES CAN'T KEEP
MONEY BUT YOUR ELECTED
GIVING THEM MONEY.
REPRESENTATIVES CAN'T KEEP
IN ONLY TWO YEARS UNITED STATES
GIVING THEM MONEY.
HAVE GIVEN ISRAEL THIRTY THREE
IN ONLY TWO YEARS UNITED STATES
BILLION DOLLARS CRANKIN TO JOIN
HAVE GIVEN ISRAEL THIRTY THREE
HUMAN RACE AND TAKE THESE
BILLION DOLLARS CRANKIN TO JOIN
LOSERS OUT.
HUMAN RACE AND TAKE THESE
>> THANK YOU.
LOSERS OUT.
NO THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS PORN DAILY
NO THANK YOU.
.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS PORN DAILY
NO, I BELIEVE THAT YOU HAVE
.
DEMOCRACY NO ONE HAS EVER ASKED
NO, I BELIEVE THAT YOU HAVE
CHANGE THAT MA'AM.
DEMOCRACY NO ONE HAS EVER ASKED
I ARE IT IT MONEY MY IS TOIS
BAILEY BUT I JUST GOT A
QUESTION FOR EVERYBODY RUFOUS
HOW MANY PEOPLE HERE SUFFER
FROM ANXIETY OR HAVE PTSD
BECAUSE YOU DON'T KNOW IF
YOU'RE GOING TO MAKE IT BACK TO
YOUR HOUSE EVERY THAT YOU LEAVE
OUT TO DRY AWAY ON SPEC NOBODY
ANSWER THAT BUT A FEW WEEKS AGO
I WENT TO GO DO SOME WORK ON
ANOTHER SIDE OF TOWN AND TULSA
SOMEONE HOW MANY CHILDREN I HAD
I TOLD THE PERSON I HAD TEN
CHILDREN AND ESSENTIALLY WHAT I
WAS GOING THROUGH AND THEY
ASKED ME A WHAT I LIKE SOME
HELP FOR CHRISTMAS.
I TOLD THEM NO, I'M IS REALLY
CONCERNED WITH JUST GETTING
FOOD FOR MY CHILDREN.
I COULD FIGURE EVERYTHING OUT
SO I'M SORRY WHAT I WROTE TO
THEM JUST TO KIND OF GIVE YOU
AN IDEA OF WHERE I'M AT BEING A
BLACK MAN HERE IN ANN ARBOR
THIS IS MY SON AMERADA.
SO WHAT I ASKED ME WHAT DO YOU
WANT FOR CHRISTMAS?
I SAID I WOULD LIKE TO SIT DOWN
AND HAVE A REAL CONVERSATION
WITH THE MAYOR OF ANN ARBOR AND
HEAD OF OUR LAW ENFORCEMENT
AGENCIES IN THE COUNTY TO LET
THEM HEAR AND SEE HOW THAT
PREDATORY PRACTICES HAVE RUINED
MY LIFE FOR THE PAST TWO
DECADES.
MY ENTIRE LIFE I HAVE LIVED IN
ANN ARBOR AND HAVE BEEN STOPPED
BY THE POLICE FOR THE DIRECTION
I HAVE BEEN STOPPED, TICKETED,
SEARCH ARRESTED, JAILED, FINED
AND MANY OTHER THINGS BY EVERY
AGENCY IN THE COUNTY THAT
INCLUDES UNIVERSITY POLICE AS
WELL.
I HAVE NEVER BEEN CONVICTED
OF ANY CRIME OTHER THAN FAILURE
TO PAY TRAFFIC TICKETS AND
DRIVING WHILE LICENSE SUSPENDED
.
I HAVE SPENT MORE MONEY AND
DAYS IN JAIL FOR NOT PAYING
TRAFFIC TICKETS I COULD NOT
AFFORD SINCE I'VE BEEN A
TEENAGER FOR I BELIEVE IT
SIMPLY BECAUSE I'M A BLACK MAN
ROAMING THE SUBURBS I LIVE.
I HAVE ALWAYS DESCRIPTION BUT
NEVER MET THE CRITERIA SO EVERY
TIME I GET STOPPED AND POLICE
DON'T FIND WHATEVER IT IS I'M
LOOKING FOR ISSUE MORE TICKETS
I'M ABLE TO PAY AMATZIA GO
FARTHER AND HAVE BEEN FOR MOST
OF MY PARENTING YEARS I WAKE UP
EVERY DAY AND MAKE A WAY I DO
NOT RECEIVE GOVERNMENT
ASSISTANCE.
I HAVE NEVER HAD GOVERNMENT
PROVIDED HOUSING.
I HAVE BEEN EMPLOYED SINCE
FIFTH GRADE AND GOT MY FIRST
OFFICIAL JOB AT THE AGE OF 13.
I WORK FROM AGE 13 TO THIRTY
SIX OVER TWENTY THREE YEARS
STRAIGHT UNTIL I WAS INVOLVED
IN A NEAR DEATH BY CRASH
LEAVING ME HOSPITALIZED AND IN
A COMA.
AT TIMES I WORKED THREE AND
FOUR JOBS SO I HAVE A MY
CHILDREN COME TO MY PLACE
OF EMPLOYMENT OR SLEEP IN THE
CAR UNTIL I GET A BREAK TO TAKE
THEM TO SCHOOL OR TO PRACTICE.
I'M NOT LOOKING FOR ANYONE TO
FEEL SORRY FOR ME AND MY FAMILY
WHICH IS WHY I SUDDENLY DEAL
WITH THIS.
MY CHILDREN ARE WATCHING AND I
HAVE TO BE STRONG.
I'VE BEEN DISABLED SINCE THE
ACCIDENT AND UNABLE TO WORK
AUTO JOBS ALL THE TIME LIKE I
ONCE DID AND TO STILL HAVE THIS
DARK CLOUD OF UNCERTAINTY OVER
MY DAILY BECAUSE I'M BLACK AND
CHOOSE TO RAISE MY FAMILY WHERE
IT'S SAFE, RESOURCEFUL OFFER
WORLD CLASS EDUCATION IS
ACTUALLY DIABOLICAL BUT THEY
ALWAYS TELL ME WHEN THEY STOP
ME IT'S FOR DIFFERENT REASONS
AND WHEN THEY RUN MY NAME AND
IT SAYS MY LICENSE IS SUSPENDED
I HAVE TO GO THROUGH THIS
ORDEAL
.
THANK YOU ALL
>> OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS KATHY
GRISWOLD
CATEGORIES.
FIRST I WANT TO SAY SOMETHING
IN DEFENSE OF THE ENGINEER WHO
WAS AT THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION MEETING IN NOVEMBER
WHICH I WATCHED THAT AND I
ACTUALLY BECAME SICK TO MY
STOMACH PHYSICALLY ILL AS A
RESULT OF WHAT WAS HAPPENING.
BUT WASN'T THE FAULT OF THE
ENGINEER.
IT IS THE FAULT OF THE MAYOR
AND CITY COUNCIL FOR CREATING A
VOID OF OPERATIONAL LEADERSHIP
IN THIS CITY SO LET'S NOT BLAME
ONE ENGINEER WHO WAS PUT IN
THAT POSITION BECAUSE SHE DOES
NOT BELIEVE HER
RESPONSIBILITIES OPERATIONS AND
IT NEVER HAS BEEN AT THAT
MEETING COUNCIL MEMBER DARMA
ACKMANN ASK HOW DOES ANN ARBOR
DIFFER FROM THE COMMUNITIES
WHERE THE CRASH RATE IS GOING
DOWN?
AND I THOUGHT ABOUT THAT AND A
FEW THINGS CAME OFF MY HEAD
IMMEDIATELY.
FIRST OF ALL, I INTRODUCED A
RESOLUTION AND IT WAS APPROVED
BY COUNCIL TO HIRE A
TRANSPORTATION OPERATIONS
ENGINEER I'M SORRY MANAGER.
THAT POSITION WAS POSTED AT A
VERY LOW LEVEL INTENTIONALLY SO
NO ONE WAS HIRED.
WE DO NOT HAVE OPERATIONAL
OVERSIGHT.
WE'RE NOT STREET LIGHTS GO OUT.
WE WAIT UNTIL SOMEONE COMPLAINS
AND WE SEND THE TICKET TO DTG
BECAUSE STREET LIGHTING IS NOT
OUR RESPONSIBILITY.
THAT'S NOT A PROJECT THAT'S
OPERATIONS.
I ALSO INTRODUCED A RESOLUTION
PASSED TO EVALUATE HOW HOW OUR
CROSSWALKS ACTUALLY FUNCTION.
HOW DO THEY OPERATE?
WELL, STAFF JUST CHANGE THEIR
PROJECT TO BE A REVIEW OF OUR
CROSSWALK DESIGN STANDARDS
AGAIN, NO OPERATIONAL CAPACITY.
I'M NOT SURE THAT THERE IS AN
UNDERSTANDING OF OPERATIONS BUT
ANYWAY A FEW OTHER IDEAS WE
NEED GOOD LIGHTING, WE NEED
SITE DISTANCE AND WE'RE MAKING
AN IMPROVEMENT THERE.
WE NEED CLEAR, CONCISE
COMMUNICATIONS OF OUR
PEDESTRIAN ORDINANCE.
I'M GOING TO POST THIS ON OUR
WEBSITE BECAUSE THE POLICY
MAKERS THAT WE HAVE DO NOT HAVE
THE FACT NOT ONLY THAT WE HAVE
SUCH A VOID IN LEADERSHIP
WITHIN TRANSPORTATION
OPERATIONS THAT WHAT YOU'VE
SEEN TONIGHT IS MANY COMMUNITY
LEADERS FRUSTRATED BECAUSE THE
JOB IS NOT GETTING DONE AND
YOU'RE TRYING TO FILL THE VOID
BUT THEY DON'T HAVE
THE BIG
PICTURE LIKE A TRANSPORTATION
OPERATIONS MANAGER.
WHAT WE NEED KNOWLEDGEABLE
STAFF AS I SAID, WE NEED PURE
VISION ZERO STOP CHERRY PICKING
THE EASY STUFF AND JUST A FINAL
THOUGHT.
WHAT KEEPS REPLAYING IN MY HEAD
IS JUST WELLSTAR WAR ISN'T
MURDER IF YOU DON'T KNOW LOOK
IT UP.
WHAT WOULD BE THE LYRICS AND
ANN ARBOR TRANSPORTATIONS ON
WHERE REALITY IS JUST AN
INCONVENIENCE YOU THANK YOU.
OUR NEXT SPEAKER IS ABACA
IBRAHIM
.
GOOD EVENING DEBORAH .
>> MY NAME IS IBRAHIM.
I'M HERE TO ADDRESS A NUMBER
OF MATTERS WHICH THREE IS NOT
GOING TO A LOT TO BE HONEST
WITH YOU.
SO I'VE BEEN QUIETLY TRYING TO
ADDRESS THESE MATTERS WITH THE
CITY TO GET THEM RESOLVED AND I
HAVE MADE MEETING WITH YOU
MAYOR TAYLOR AND MR. DELACOURT
SOMETIME IN THE NEAR FUTURE
RIGHT?
I BELIEVE SO.
BUT THE REST OF YOU MAY OR MAY
NOT KNOW ME OR WHY I'M HERE.
I SENT EMAIL TO YOU, MISS
HARRISON.
DID YOU RECEIVE THAT?
YOU DID NOT.
OK, WELL I'VE BEEN DEALING WITH
SOME ISSUES IN THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR BUILDING APARTMENT AS FAR
AS FORGERY, PERJURY, FRAUD BY
CITY OFFICIALS CREATING
DOCUMENTS THAT DON'T EXIST,
HAVING THEM SIGNED OFF BY
PEOPLE WHO DIDN'T WORK FOR THE
CITY AT THE TIME PRESENTING
THEM IN COURT AND HAVING ME
EVICTED FROM MY BUSINESS, MY
FAMILY.
I HAVE BEEN RESIDENTS OF THE
CITY, OUR NEIGHBOR FOR OVER
TWENTY FIVE YEARS.
WE ARE LAW ABIDING TAXPAYING
CITIZENS.
WE'VE BEEN OPERATING BUSINESS
FOR OVER SIX YEARS AND LAST
DECEMBER, ALMOST ONE YEAR FROM
TODAY WE WERE EVICTED TO A
QUARTER FICTION BECAUSE PETER
HELD THE CITY AND EVERY
BUILDING INSPECTOR FAILED TO
PUT FOUR FAILED INSPECTIONS
OF DANGEROUS BUILDING
INSPECTIONS.
ONE CITY FOUND NO WEBSITE TO
DREAM.
THE LANDLORD PRESENTED TO THE
COURT THAT THE PROPERTY HAD
BEEN REMEDIATED AFTER A FLOOD
LOSS WHICH IT WAS NOT AND I WAS
NOT GIVING THIS INFORMATION TO
AFTER A FOIA REQUEST MONTHS
LATER.
STILL TO THIS DAY THESE
INSPECTIONS HAVE NOT BEEN
POSTED ON THE CITY WEBSITE AND
NOTHING HAS BEEN DONE AS FAR AS
MANY COMPLAINTS ARE FILED
AGAINST THE CITY ABOUT THIS.
I NOT YOU MR. TONY ABOUT THIS
I'VE DROPPED OFF LETTERS AND
COMPLAINTS TO YOUR OFFICE.
I'M TO RECEIVED THEM.
I'VE JUST GOT A REQUEST BACK
FROM EMAILS CORRESPONDENCE
BETWEEN CITY CITY OFFICIALS
ABOUT THIS MATTER.
SO I'M WELL AWARE AS YOU ALL
ARE WELL AWARE RIGHT.
ALL I'M ASKING IS THAT YOU
ADDRESS THE ISSUE PLEASE.
PETER HELD ON ADMINISTRATIVE
LEAVE UNTIL THIS IS
INVESTIGATED ON PAID
ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE BY THE WAY
AND WE ADDRESS THIS IN A CIVIL
MATTER BECAUSE WHAT HAPPENS
NEXT I THIS IS HUNDREDS
OF MILLIONS OF DOLLARS, RIGHT.
THIS IS OVER EIGHTEEN THOUSAND
BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS OVER A
TEN YEAR SPAN IN EACH VIOLATION
IS A THOUSAND DOLLARS.
AN E VIOLATION IS SEPARATE
EVERY VIOLATION EVERY DAY
OF THE VIOLATION CONTINUES A
SEPARATE VIOLATION, SEPARATE
OFFENSE.
EIGHTEEN THOUSAND THAT IS
UNHEARD OF UNPRECEDENTED
AGAINST ONE FAMILY, ONE
BUSINESS.
>> I LOOK FORWARD TO MEETING
WITH PEOPLE BUT THANK YOU.
ARE THERE COMMUNICATIONS TODAY
FROM COUNCIL COUNCILOR WATSON
COUNCIL MEMBER MALIK CAN I
INVITE YOU TO AWARD TO
LISTENING SESSION ON SATURDAY
DECEMBER 13TH AT TREVER WOOD
LIBRARY FROM THREE TO FOUR P.M.
THIS LISTENING SESSION WILL
FOCUS ON THE COMPREHENSIVE LAND
USE PLAN AND WILL FEATURE STAFF
FROM THE PLANNING DEPARTMENT.
WE HOPE TO SEE YOU THERE
COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA.
>> THANK YOU MAYOR COUNCIL
MEMBER GOZI EDMOND ASKED ME TO
SEND HER APOLOGIES TO ALL
OF YOU FOR NOT BEING HERE THIS
EVENING.
AS MANY OF YOU KNOW, HER FOUR
YEAR OLD SON IS RECOVERING FROM
A RECENT HOSPITALIZATION AND IS
TEMPORARILY IMMUNOCOMPROMISED
WHICH REQUIRES HER TO STAY HOME
WITH HIM AND LIMIT THEIR
EXPOSURE.
SHE ASKED ME TO EXPRESS THAT
WHILE IT MAY TAKE SLIGHTLY
LONGER THAN USUAL FOR HER TO
RESPOND, SHE REMAINS FULLY
ENGAGED IN COUNCIL WORK AND I
KNOW THAT SHE SIGNED ON AS A
CO-SPONSOR TO DC TO TONIGHT TO
SIGNAL HER JUST HER SUPPORT
DESPITE HER ABSENCE.
BUT SHE SAID SHE REMAINS
AVAILABLE TO WARD THREE
RESIDENTS BY EMAIL AND PHONE
WHICH CAN BE FOUND ON THE CITY
WEBSITE.
>> THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBER
BRAKE'S THANKS.
I WANTED TO SORT TOUCH
RELATIVELY BRIEFLY REGARDING
SOME OF THE COMMENTS THAT WERE
MADE REGARDING THE NOVEMBER
19TH TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
MEETING AND THE 500000 FOR
VISION ZERO AND WORK THAT WAS
THAT THE PUBLIC COMMENTERS ARE
SPEAKING TO FOR THOSE I THINK
MOST PROBABLY NO BUT MAYBE NOT
ALL THAT I'VE BEEN THE SPONSOR
OR CO-SPONSOR TO EVERY SINGLE
RESOLUTION THAT'S COME FORWARD
TRYING TO MAKE SURE THAT WE'RE
ACTUALLY IMPLEMENTING OUR
VISION ZERO SPACE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN.
AND SO THIS IS SOMETHING THAT I
CARE VERY DEEPLY ABOUT.
I THINK AS FOLKS KNOW AND IN
PAYING ATTENTION CLOSELY TO SO
I UNDERSTAND THE FRUSTRATION
AND QUESTIONS THAT CAME UP THIS
EVENING AND WANT TO ACKNOWLEDGE
THAT I THINK THAT THERE IS MORE
INFORMATION THAT COULD BE
COMING A SUBSEQUENT
PRESENTATION THAT MIGHT BE
WARRANTED AT TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION.
BUT I ALSO WANTED TO PROVIDE
SOME INFORMATION THAT'S BEEN
PRESENTED TO US BECAUSE I THINK
EVERYBODY MAY NOT HAVE RECEIVED
THAT.
SO FOR EXAMPLE ON THE
ENVIRONMENT THE CATHERINE
STREET PROJECT, I WILL ALSO
ACKNOWLEDGE THAT I WAS
SURPRISED WHEN STAFF PRESENTED
THAT TO US AND HAD MEETINGS
WITH STAFF TO UNDERSTAND MORE
OF THEIR REASONING BEHIND IT.
AND I THINK THAT IT'S IMPORTANT
TO UNDERSTAND AND I'M
SUPPORTIVE OF OF US MOVING
FORWARD WITH THIS PROJECT I'VE
HAD SOME PROVIDED PUBLIC
COMMENT SAY YOU KNOW, WE SHOULD
NOT HAVE AND WE WE SHOULD NOT
PERFECT SHOULD NOT BE THE ENEMY
OF THE GOOD.
>> WE SHOULDN'T YOU KNOW, WE
DON'T HAVE TO HAVE THE PERFECT
PROJECT ESPECIALLY AND BUT THE
REALITY IS IS THIS PROJECT DOES
MEET THAT RESOLUTION THAT WE
PUT FORWARD.
IT WASN'T WHAT I EXPECTED.
I THINK IT'S PERHAPS NOT WHAT A
LOT OF US EXPECTED BUT IT DID
MEET THE THE SPIRIT IT DIDN'T
MEET THE THE THE RESOLUTION.
CATHERINE STREET IS A TOP
PROJECT IN THE DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION STUDY THERE WERE
THERE HAVE BEEN SEVEN CRASHES
THERE.
ONE SERIOUS INJURY CRASH
.
YOU KNOW, STAFF HAS
ACKNOWLEDGED THAT THE REASON
THAT THEY THEY SELECTED THAT
WAS YOU KNOW, BECAUSE OF THAT
IT'S PLACE IN THE DOWNTOWN AREA
CIRCULATION STUDY THE FACT THAT
WAS SHOVEL READY, THE FACT THAT
CONCEPTUAL THE PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT HAD BEEN DONE, THE
FACT THAT IT CONNECTED TO
EMPLOYMENT CENTERS, RESIDENTIAL
COMMERCIAL RETAIL SCHOOLS AND
PARKS, THE FACT THAT BICYCLE
COUNTS THEY'RE TALLIED AROUND
SIXTY FIVE HUNDRED IN AUGUST
OF 2025 AND WHAT THEY HAD BEEN
HEARING FROM THE COMMUNITY IS
THAT THEY WANT THAT WE WANT TO
SEE THINGS GET BUILT AND THIS
IS A PROJECT THAT THEY COULD
SEE GET BUILT.
>> WE HE COULD SEE THAT WOULD
BE BUILT THIS YEAR AND I THINK
THAT'S IMPORTANT.
THEY'RE TRYING TO LISTEN TO THE
COMMUNITY ABOUT GETTING THINGS
OUT THE DOOR AND COUNSELING.
FROM MY PERSPECTIVE THIS IS NOT
THE LAST FIVE HUNDRED THOUSAND
DOLLAR ALLOCATION WE ARE GOING
TO SEE I HOPE ANOTHER ONE THIS
NEXT YEAR FOR THE COMMUNICATION
FROM COUNCIL AND BRITISH.
>> THANKS SO MUCH FOR EVERYONE
WHO COMMENTED AND THANKS FOR
RESPONDING COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS
.
I JUST WANTED TO TALK ABOUT THE
ANN ARBOR SNOW MATCH PROGRAM
THAT'S ACTIVE IF YOU WANT TO
VOLUNTEER TO SHOVEL SNOW FOR
SOMEONE OR IF YOU ARE 55 OR
OLDER OR USE SELFIE IDENTIFY AS
HAVING A DISABILITY SEARCH A
TWO SNOW MATCH ON THE WEB AND
YOU WILL FIND A FORM TO SIGN UP
.
>> I ALSO WANT TO NOTE BECAUSE
THIS CAME UP AT THE
THANKSGIVING DINNER TABLE THAT
THERE ARE NEW RESIDENTIAL
REBATES FOR LEAF BLOWERS FOR
RESIDENTS SO THAT PROJECT WAS
LAUNCHED ON NOVEMBER 21ST AND
WILL RUN THROUGH THE END OF THE
YEAR WHICH IS NOT LONG OR UNTIL
FUNDING IS EXPENDED WHICH MAY
BE EVEN SOONER.
SO IF YOU HAVE BEEN HOPING TO
LIBERATE YOURSELF FROM YOUR
RAKE YOU CAN DO IT IN AN ALL
ELECTRIC WAY.
>> NOW FURTHER COMMUNICATION
FROM COUNCIL
WE HAVE BEFORE US
OH SORRY ELECTRICO JUST
CONFIRMATION THE FOLLOWING
APPOINTMENT THAT WAS PRESENTED
TO COUNCIL ON NOVEMBER 17
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE TO THE
ROGERS COMMISSION SHEILA
RASOULI MAY HAVE A MOTION
PLEASE MOVE BY COUNCILOR DENHA
SECOND BY COUNCILOR HARRISON
DISCUSSION WELL FAVRE POSED IT
IS APPROVED WE HAVE THE FORCE
THE CONSENT AGENDA FOR MOTION
PLEASE TO APPROVE THE CONSENT
AGENDA MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
WATSON SECONDED BY COUNCIL
MEMBER MALIK DISCUSSION OF THE
CONSENT AGENDA COUNCIL MEMBER
CORNELL.
I'M JUST GOING TO SAY I'M
PRETTY EXCITED SCCA ONE A
RESOLUTION FOR THE MIDNIGHT
MADNESS THAT'S FRIDAY.
>> I HOPE TO SEE YOU ALL
DOWNTOWN.
FURTHER DISCUSSION OF THE
CONSENT AGENDA OR FAVORITE
OR
OPPOSE THE CONSENT AGENDA IS
APPROVED WITH NINE COUNCIL
MEMBERS PRESENT TO SATISFY THE
EIGHT VOTE REQUIREMENT WITH
RESPECT TO SEET TO SEE A TEN WE
NOW COME TO A SET OF PUBLIC
HEARINGS.
PUBLIC HEARINGS ARE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK ACCOUNT
POTENTIATE THANK YOU.
WE NOW COME TO A SET OF PUBLIC
HEARINGS.
PUBLIC HEARINGS ARE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC TO SPEAK ACCOUNTS
ON THE COMMUNITY ABOUT THE
SPECIFIC SUBJECT MATTER OF THE
PUBLIC HEARING TO SPEAK AT A
PUBLIC HEARING ONE NEED NOT
HAVE SIGNED UP IN ADVANCE.
BUT YOUR SPEECH MUST RELATE TO
THE SPECIFIC SUBJECT MATTER
OF THE PUBLIC HEARING THAT IS
TO SAY THE SPECIFIC ITEM ON THE
AGENDA TO WHICH THE PUBLIC
HEARING RELATES SPEAKERS IN ALL
INSTANCES WILL THREE MINUTES IN
WHICH TO SPEAK.
>> SO PLEASE PAY CLOSE
ATTENTION TO THE TIME OUR CLERK
OR THE TIME CLOCK WILL NOTIFY
YOU IN THIRTY SECONDS REMAINING
AND WHEN YOUR TIME HAS EXPIRED
WHEN YOUR TIME IS EXPIRED,
PLEASE CONCLUDE YOUR REMARKS
CEDE THE FLOOR.
>> OUR FIRST PUBLIC HEARING
TODAY IS PUBLIC ENEMY NUMBER
ONE AN AUDIENCE TO AMEND
CHAPTER FORTY TREES AND OTHER
VEGETATION OF TITLE THREE PARKS
AND PUBLIC GROUNDS OF THE
CODE OF THE CITY BANABA.
>> IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING?
CATHY GRISWOLD I'M TOLD THIS IS
A NEW PUBLIC HEARING BECAUSE WE
WENT BACK.
I WANT TO THANK STAFF FOR THIS
.
IT IS A GOOD FIRST STEP.
THERE IS STILL MUCH TO DO
AND
TO HOMEOWNERS TO LET THEM KNOW
THAT WE ARE GOING TO START
ENFORCING THIS BECAUSE I WOULD
SAY THAT IN MY NEIGHBORHOOD AT
LEAST TWENTY FIVE PERCENT
OF THE HOMES ARE NO LONGER IN
COMPLIANCE AND THIS IS GOING TO
BE QUITE SHOCKING IF THEY
SIMPLY GET A REMINDER ON THEIR
DOOR.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN
HOUSE WHO'D LIKE TO SPEAK AT
THIS PUBLIC HEARING?
IS THERE ANYONE LINE WHO'D
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING CAMPAIGN OR DO
YOU HAVE A COMMENT?
>> YEAH.
HI THERE.
YOU KNOW, I WAS WAITING IN THE
PHONE QUEUE TO SPEAK DURING THE
FIRST PUBLIC HEARING AND I WILL
I WILL VIOLATE THE COUNCIL
RULES BY NOT SPEAKING TO THE
MAJORITY OF THE 40 BEFORE ME.
BUT I JUST I'M VERY
DISAPPOINTED THAT THE TECHNICAL
DIFFICULTIES OR WHATEVER WAS
GOING ON DIDN'T ALLOW ME TO
SPEAK EARLIER.
I JUST WANT TO CALL AND SAY
THAT DURING ANOTHER PUBLIC
HEARING IT'S MY ONLY
OPPORTUNITY.
BUT YOU DON'T HAVE PUBLIC
HEARINGS AT THE END OF MEETINGS
ANYMORE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK
MAYOR.
I DON'T SEE ANY OTHER CALLERS
ON LINE WITH THEIR HANDS
.
>> SEE IN THIS PUBLIC HEARING
IS CLOSED TO PUBLIC ENEMY
NUMBER TWO RESOLUTION TO
APPROVE A BROWNFIELD PLAN FOR
TOWNY HOMES AT 1780 AND 1788
CYO CHURCH ROAD.
TWENTY TWO TO TWENTY FIVE AND
TO THIRTY FIVE S WAGNER ROAD
FIFTEEN THIRTY FIVE FIFTEEN 63
15 65 15 67 S MAPLE ROAD AND 12
88 AND 12 PART OF ME 13 69
JEWITT AVENUE.
IS THERE ANYONE IN HOUSE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING?
GOOD EVENING.
MY NAME IS SARAH LAWRENCE.
I'M THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
OF THE ANN ARBOR COMMUNITY LAND
TRUST.
I ALSO LIVE IN WARD FOUR AND I
WOULD JUST LIKE TO SAY THANK
YOU TO ALL THE PEOPLE WHO HAVE
CONTRIBUTED TO THIS BROWNFIELD
PLAN THAT'S COMING FORWARD.
THIS IS OUR FIRST DEVELOPMENT
AND WE COULD NOT HAVE DONE IT
WITHOUT MANY OF YOU WITHOUT
CITY STAFF, WITHOUT DOZENS
OF SUPPORTERS.
AN AMAZING BOARD ARCHITECT,
GENERAL CONTRACTOR.
THIS HAS REALLY BEEN A
WONDERFUL COLLABORATION
OF PEOPLE COMING TOGETHER TO
TRY TO SOLVE A SIGNIFICANT
PROBLEM FOR OUR COMMUNITY AND
IT'S BEEN DELIGHTFUL TO WORK
WITH EVERYONE WHO'S CONTRIBUTED
TO THIS EFFORT OVER THE LAST
TWO YEARS.
>> THANK YOU
.
HI.
ADAM JUSZKIEWICZ AGAIN FROM THE
FOURTH WARD.
I'M SPEAKING TONIGHT IN SUPPORT
OF THE BROWNFIELD TIP FOR THE
ENTIRE COMMUNITY LAND TRUST.
I THINK IT'S IMPORTANT FOR US
TO HAVE A YES AND APPROACH TO
HOUSING IN ANN ARBOR AND
PROJECTS LIKE THIS SHOW A
DIFFERENT MODEL FOR ATTAINABLE
HOUSING PRODUCTION THAT WE
HAVEN'T SEEN BEFORE IN OUR
CITY.
THIS WILL PROVIDE HOUSING FOR
ESSENTIAL WORKERS IN OUR
COMMUNITY WITH A RELATIVELY
SMALL SUBSIDY IN THE FORM OF A
FUNDING.
I HOPE YOU VOTE YES ON THIS
TONIGHT.
FURTHERMORE, I KNOW THE COUNTY
HAS BEEN THROUGH THE WRINGER ON
THESE PROJECTS AND I HOPE TO
SEE ZONING CHANGES THAT MAKE
BUILDING THIS KIND OF THING
EASY BY RIGHT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU
.
CHAIRMAN HALEY, IF SHE TOLD YOU
A QUICK QUESTION, THE ADDRESS
IS LISTED ARE THEY GOING TO
NEED ANY KIND OF LAND
REMEDIATION OR ANY KIND
OF THING OR THEY'RE JUST KIND
OF BEING TOLD THEY'RE
BROWNVILLE SO YOU CAN GET
SPECIAL BUILDING STUFF THAT
DOESN'T SOUND RIGHT OR A
CORRECT WAY TO GO ABOUT DOING
THINGS, YOU KNOW WHAT I MEAN?
IF THE LAND IS NOT A BROWNFIELD
LABEL AS A BROWNFIELD THIS LINE
THAT PEOPLE IT'S JUST LAND AND
HAS TO BE DEVELOPED SAY IT
NEEDS TO BE DEVELOPED AND
DEVELOPING THE RIGHT WAY AND
I'M PRETTY SURE THERE'S A TIFF
FOR SOMETHING ASSOCIATED WITH
THIS HOW TO COLLECT STUFF.
BUT WHAT I'M SAYING YOU GUYS
SHOULD REALLY DO IT THE RIGHT
WAY AND TELL PEOPLE THE LAND IS
BROWNFIELD.
IT ACTUALLY IS SOME KIND
OF LAND REMEDIATION CLEAN UP
BUT IT DOESN'T SEEM LIKE IT
DOESN'T IT BASICALLY JUST SOME
PEOPLE IT IS SO THEREFORE TO
GET SPECIAL BUILDING RATES TO
JUST TO DEVELOP IT.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
>> HI EVERYONE.
AS AN ESSENTIAL WORKER AT
MICHIGAN I'D LIKE TO THANK
EVERYONE AT THE HQ THEODICY AND
ENZLER FOR ALL OF HER HARD WORK
AND I'D LIKE TO THANK CITY
COUNCIL FOR VOTING ON THE 26TH.
I KNOW AS IS AS AN ESSENTIAL
WORKER AND TO ALL THE ESSENTIAL
WORKER WORKERS IN ANN ARBOR,
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR VOTING ON
THIS TONIGHT.
>> THANK YOU
.
I WAS AN EARLY INVESTOR IN THIS
AND I DON'T FEEL LIKE WE WENT
THROUGH THE WRINGER BUT I DO
THINK THAT IT WAS A CHALLENGING
PROCESS AND I BELIEVE THAT THIS
IS REALLY A PROOF OF CONCEPT
AND ONCE THIS IS DONE WE'LL BE
ABLE TO MOVE MUCH MORE QUICKLY
AND AND GET MORE HOUSING BUILT
FOR PEOPLE WHO REALLY NEEDED
OUR ESSENTIAL WORKERS IN ANN
ARBOR.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK
YOU, TAYLOR.
COUNCIL MEMBERS, THANK YOU FOR
THE OPPORTUNITY TO SPEAK AND
THANK YOU FOR THE THOUGHTFUL
WORK YOU AND STAFF HAVE ALREADY
PUT INTO THE TINY HOMES
BROWNFIELD PLAN.
MY HAT'S OFF ESPECIALLY TO
GEORGE RYAN WHO JUST JOINED THE
CITY HERE AND HE'S BEEN A KEY
POINT OF CONTACT FOR THE
COMMUNITY LAND TRUST AND BRIAN
CHAMBERS.
I LIVE IN THE THIRD WARD AND I
SERVE ON THE BOARDS OF THE
EQUITABLE ANN ARBOR LAND TRUST
AS WELL AS THE ENTIRE ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION.
TONIGHT YOU HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY
TO ADVANCE A SOLUTION THAT
BRINGS TOGETHER RESIDENTS AND
LEADERS ACROSS THE ENTIRE
POLITICAL SPECTRUM.
PEOPLE WHO OFTEN DISAGREE ON
ZONING OR THE COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN ARE UNITED BEHIND THE
SIMPLE IDEA A COMMUNITY NEEDS
MORE BELOW MARKET HOMEOWNERSHIP
FOR THE WORKERS WHO MAKE ANN
ARBOR RUN TOWNY HOMES WILL
CREATE TWENTY SIX PERMANENTLY
AFFORDABLE SHARED EQUITY HOMES
HOMES PRICED BETWEEN ROUGHLY
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY FIVE
THOUSAND AND THREE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY THOUSAND FOR HOUSEHOLDS
EARNING 30 TO 90 PERCENT OF THE
AREA.
MEDIAN INCOME IN A CITY WHERE
THE MEDIAN HOME PRICE IS NEAR
501 THOUSAND.
I LOOKED IT UP ON OUR DOTCOM.
THESE HOMES REMAIN AFFORDABLE
BECAUSE THEY ARE HELD WITHIN
THE COMMUNITY LAND TRUST A
MODEL DESIGNED FOR LONG TERM
STABILITY AND GENERATIONAL
AFFORDABILITY.
THIS IS EXACTLY THE KIND
OF SMALL SCALE GENERAL DENSITY
HOUSING ENVISIONED BY THE DRAFT
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
CALLS FOR HOMES NEAR TRANSIT
AND SCHOOLS HOMES THAT FIT INTO
EXISTING NEIGHBORHOODS AND
SUPPORT LASTING ECONOMIC
DIVERSITY.
TINY HOMES IS A DIRECT
EXPRESSION OF THAT SHARED
VISION.
WE ALSO KNOW FROM THE COUNTY
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY STUDY
FROM EIGHT TO ZERO AND FROM
YOUR OWN COMMISSIONS THAT
MODERATE INCOME WORKERS ARE
BEING PUSHED FURTHER OUT EVERY
YEAR MORE TEACHERS, NURSES, LAB
TECH CITY STAFF AND CRITICAL
WORKERS NOW COMMUTING FROM
WHITMORE LAKE BRIGHTON AND
BEYOND.
THIS IS NOT SUSTAINABLE FOR OUR
CLIMATE GOALS FOR EMPLOYERS OR
FOR OUR SENSE OF COMMUNITY.
I ALSO WANT TO DIRECTLY ADDRESS
QUESTIONS ABOUT LONG TERM
ENFORCEABILITY.
COMMUNITY LAND TRUSTS ARE NOT
NEW IN MICHIGAN.
THEY ARE WELL-ESTABLISHED AND
ALREADY OPERATING SUCCESSFULLY
IN GRAND RAPIDS, DETROIT, GRAND
HAVEN AND OTHERS IN EVERY ONE
OF THOSE COMMUNITIES.
KELTY'S WORK WITH THEIR CITIES
AND COUNTIES USING THE SAME
TOOLS AS THIS PROJECT RECORDED
AFFORDABILITY COVENANTS.
NINETY NINE YEAR LEASES, RETAIL
PRICE FORMULAS, SUCCESSOR
STEWARD CLAUSES AND PROFIT
DISSOLUTION RULES THAT REQUIRE
ASSETS TO TRANSFER TO ANOTHER
PUBLIC OR CHARITABLE STEWARD.
THESE MECHANISMS ARE ALREADY
FUNCTIONING UNDER MICHIGAN LAW
AND THEY ENSURE AFFORDABILITY
THAT LASTS FAR BEYOND ANY 30
STATUTORY REQUIREMENT.
FINALLY AND MOST IMPORTANTLY
THE FAMILIES HOLDING
RESERVATIONS SOME FROM TONIGHT
FOR THESE HOMES HAVE WAITED
PATIENTLY THROUGH ZONING PLAN
CHANGES IN LAW AND PUBLIC
PROCESSES.
SOME HOPE TO CELEBRATE NEXT
THANKSGIVING IN A HOME THEY CAN
FINALLY AFFORD WITHIN THE CITY.
THIS PLAN GIVES THEM THAT
CHANCE FOR THESE REASONS FOR
AFFORDABILITY, CLIMATE,
NEIGHBORHOOD STABILITY I
RESPECTFULLY ASK APPROVED THAT
TINY HOMES BROWNFIELD TYPE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK GOOD EVENING COUNSEL
PETER ALLEN SPEAKING FIRST.
TWO QUICK POINTS FIRST TO THIS
GENTLEMAN'S POINT ABOUT
BROWNFIELD IF IT'S IMPORTANT TO
UNDERSTAND THAT LAW WAS CHANGED
IN TWENTY TWENTY THREE TO ALLOW
AFFORDABILITY TO BE ABLE TO
CAPTURE TAXES THAT WERE NOT
BEING CHARGED NOW IN ADDITION
TO A BROWNFIELD OR
ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP.
SO IT'S A GREAT NEW CHANGE IN
THE STATE LAW THAT IS MAKING
THIS ALL HAPPEN.
SECONDLY, SARAH LAWRENCE AND I
FOUND ANOTHER SISTER NONPROFIT
THAT CONTROL ANIMAL LAND TRUST
IN 2013 TO TAKE THIS IDEA SHE'S
BEEN SO SUCCESSFUL WITH
NEIGHBORHOOD INFILL TO PUBLIC
SITES OWNED BY THE CITY, THE
UNIVERSITY, THE COMMUNITY
COLLEGE PERHAPS CHURCHES TAKE
THE AIR RIGHTS OVER PARKING
LOTS AND TURN THOSE INTO
AFFORDABLE HOUSING.
>> YOU'LL BE HEARING MORE ABOUT
THAT LATER.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU.
>> IS THERE ANYONE ELSE IN
HOUSE WHO WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK
AT THIS PUBLIC HEARING?
IS THERE ANYONE ONLINE WHO
WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK AT THIS
PUBLIC HEARING?
A COUPLE OF CALLERS ONLINE,
THEY'RE COLLER WITH THE PHONE
NUMBER AND AGAIN FIVE THREE
FOUR.
DO YOU HAVE A COMMENT?
GO AHEAD.
>> GOOD EVENING.
THIS IS ROBERT CALLING FROM ONE
TO ZERO TO TRAVIS STREET IN ANN
ARBOR.
I SUPPORT IT AND I HOPE YOU DO
HOPE TO SEE YOU ARE
PARTICIPATING.
WANT TO MAKE A COUPLE OF QUICK
COMMENTS THAT THIS IS VERY
IMPORTANT FOR HOME OWNERSHIP IN
PARTICULAR AT THE MODEST LEVEL
OF HOUSING THERE'S NOTHING
THERE NO RIGHT NOW THAT THE
MARKET'S DOING TO PROVIDE THAT
KIND OF HOME OWNERSHIP
OPPORTUNITIES AND THIS IS NOT
SOMETHING THAT'S PROVIDED FOR
SOME OF OUR OTHER PROGRAMS THAT
DO HELP PEOPLE FIND HOUSING AND
CREATE NEW HOUSING IN ANN
ARBOR.
BUT MOST OF THOSE ARE RENTAL
HOUSING.
SO THE ABILITY FOR SOMEBODY TO
BE ABLE TO BUY A HOME IN ANN
ARBOR THIS IS A UNIQUE
OPPORTUNITY THE STATE
CREATED SOMEWHAT CHANGES A
COUPLE OF YEARS GO AS PETER
JUST MENTIONED AND I HOPE YOU
TAKE ADVANTAGE THAT THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU
.
THERE ARE A LOT OF STRONG HEY,
MY NAME IS SARAH ARMSTRONG IN
THE FOURTH WARD ONE FIVE THREE
FOUR WOODLAND DRIVE.
I WOULD LIKE TO SPEAK IN
SUPPORT OF PROPOSAL FOR THE
TEST FOR THE ANN ARBOR LAND.
I'M REALLY EXCITED BY HOW THEIR
PROJECT WILL BE AN ADDITION TO
THE CITY AND THE COUNTY'S
ALREADY EXISTING PROJECTS
INCLUDING PROJECTS HEADED BY
THE ANNENBERG HOUSING
COMMISSION AND AVALON.
I'M GLAD THAT METAL PEOPLE HAVE
ALREADY RESPONDED TO THE
COMMENT ABOUT FUNDING AND I
HOPE THAT THE COUNCIL WILL
SUPPORT AND THE COUNCIL
RECOGNIZES AND THAT OTHERS
LISTENING RECOGNIZE HOW OUR
CURRENT ZONING HAS MADE THIS
PROCESS MADE THIS PROCESS EVEN
MORE DIFFICULT THAN THAN IT
NEEDED TO BE.
AND AS A RESULT OF MINIMAL WHAT
SIZES AND LIMITATIONS ON ZONING
.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THANK YOU
.
ALEX LOWE, DO YOU HAVE.
>> HI THIS IS ALEX LOVE TO
THROUGH TO PITTSVILLE BOULEVARD
ALEX I WILL GO CAN HEAR YES YOU
ARE AUDIBLE.
>> OH HI THIS IS ALEX.
THOUGHT YOU HAD YOUR PIECE FEEL
GOOD ABOUT I AM IN SUPPORT
OF THIS AND I THINK THAT AS THE
AS IT HAS BEEN SHOWN JUST HOW
DIFFICULT IT IS TO TO BUILD
AFFORDABLE HOUSING AND ANOTHER
WE SHOULD REALLY BE CONSIDERING
ALL OF THE DIFFICULT ISSUES
THAT THE COMMUNITY LAND TRUST
HAD IN GETTING TO THIS POINT
AND AND ENSURE THAT AS MANY
OF THOSE THINGS THAT THEY HAD
TO JUMP THROUGH HOOPS FOR
BEFORE ARE IN FACT AVAILABLE
FOR EVERYONE TO DO BY RIGHT AS
SOON AS POSSIBLE.
>> SO AS A SIDE NOTE, ERICA,
WHAT'S BEING PROPOSED FOR
KATHERINE IS NOT BY DEFINITION
WHAT ABOUT A THANK YOU THANK
I
DON'T HAVE ANY OTHER COLORS
WITH HER
SEE NO IN THIS PUBLIC
HEARING IS CLOSED.
WE HAVE BEFORE US THE REGULAR
MEETING MINUTES OF NOVEMBER
17TH.
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE MA'AM.
I AM PLEASED TO APPROVE THESE
MINUTES MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
WATSON SAID BY COUNCIL BRITISH
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF THE
MINUTES OR FAVOR OR OPPOSE THE
MINUTES ARE APPROVED B WANT AN
AUDIENCE TO AMEND THE CHAPTER
FORTY TREES AND OTHER
VEGETATION OF TITLE THREE PARKS
AND PUBLIC GROUNDS THE CODE OF
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR MOVE BY
COUNCIL MEMBER CORNELL STAND
ACCOUNTS MIRROR BRIGS
DISCUSSION PLEASE OF BE1
COUNCIL MEMBER BREAKS JUST
BRIEFLY SINCE WE HAVE THIS IS
THE THIRD TIME THAT THIS IS
COMING TO US FOR THOSE WHO MAY
BE HEARING ABOUT IT FOR THE
FIRST TIME THIS IS ESSENTIALLY
A ORDINANCE CHANGE TO ALLOW
FOLKS BACK A LITTLE BIT AND
COUNCIL WE OFTEN HEAR FROM
RESIDENTS WHO ARE SEEKING TO
CREATE SORT OF MORE NATIVE
LANDSCAPES IN THEIR LAWNS AND
THEY GET A WARNING OR A TICKET
AND ASKED TO CREATE MORE
MANICURED LAWN.
AND SO WHAT THIS ORDINANCE
CHANGE DOES IS ESSENTIALLY
REMOVE THE 12 INCH HEIGHT LIMIT
FOR LAWNS TO ENABLE NATIVE
LANDSCAPES TO BE CREATED A
POLLINATOR FRIENDLY HABITATS.
THIS GOT PUSHED BACK TO FIRST
READING AT THE LAST AND THE
LAST MEETING BECAUSE THERE ARE
SOME AMENDMENTS THAT WE'VE
BROUGHT FORWARD PARTICULARLY
SORT OF THOSE ARE IN FRONT
OF US TONIGHT BUT THEY
ESSENTIALLY ALLOW FOR MORE
SPECIFICS, SPECIFICITY AROUND
WHAT SITE ANGLES LOOK LIKE ON
CORNER LOTS.
>> SO SUPPORTIVE OF SEEING THIS
MOVE FORWARD TONIGHT.
IT'S BEEN A LONG TIME COMING.
THANK STAFF FOR ALL OF THEIR
WORK ON THIS AND MAKING SURE
THAT THIS IS SOMETHING THAT
WORKS FOR COMMUNITY STANDARDS
AND PUBLIC SERVICES AND AND IS
SOMETHING THAT OUR COMMUNITY
HAS BEEN ASKING FOR FOR A LONG
FURTHER DISCUSSION.
COUNCIL MEMBER WATSON, I'D LIKE
TO PUT FORWARD AN AMENDMENT I
BELIEVE THE CLERK HAS IT AND IT
WAS COMMUNICATED IN PAPER TO
COUNCIL MEMBERS AS WELL.
THE AMENDMENT WOULD BE THE
SECTION 314 AND IT WOULD ADD
THE WORD SHRUB'S TO SUBSECTIONS
ONE AND TWO.
>> IS THERE A SECOND ON BRITISH
FRIENDLY THE BODY I CAN PROVIDE
SOME MORE.
>> YOU HAVE THE FLOOR YOU CAN
PROVIDE CONTEXT BUT IT'S ALSO
FRIENDLY.
>> OK, GOOD TO KNOW IT'S
FRIENDLY JUST TO EXPLAIN THE
EAGLE EYED AMONG YOU MAY NOTE
THAT IN THE DEFINITION SECTION
OF THIS ORDINANCE WE DEFINE
SHRUB SEPARATELY FROM
VEGETATION WHICH IS FURTHER
DOWN IN THE DEFINITIONS LIST
SINCE WE MAKE THIS DISTINCTION
AT THE START OF THE ORDINANCE
WE HAVE TO ADD SHRUBS TO THE
LIST TO IN SECTION THREE
FOURTEEN TO SPECIFY THAT SHRUBS
SHOULD NOT BE ALLOWED TO BLOCK
THE VIEW OF PEDESTRIANS,
CYCLISTS AND MOTORISTS AND WE
INCLUDE SHRUBS TO ENSURE THAT
RESIDENTS UNDERSTAND THAT
SHRUBS NEED TO BE TRIMMED TO
ALLOW FOR EIGHT FEET
OF CLEARANCE OVER SIDEWALKS AND
FIFTEEN FEET CLEARANCE OVER
STREETS AND THAT SHRUBS
SHOULDN'T BE GROWN ABOVE 30
INCHES WITHIN THE SITE
TRIANGLE.
THIS AMENDMENT FOR CLARITY WILL
NOT REQUIRE ANOTHER PUBLIC
HEARING OR ANOTHER READING AND
GLAD THAT ITS FRIENDLY CITY
COUNCIL MEMBER DISH.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBER
WATSON.
THANK YOU COUNCIL MEMBER BRIGS
FOR INTRODUCING THIS ITEM.
THANK YOU TURNY RIISER I THINK
YOU ARE SOMEWHERE OR MAYBE
YOU'RE JUST WITHIN EARSHOT
EVERYWHERE.
>> THERE YOU ARE.
THANK YOU.
COUNCIL MEMBERS HAVE BEEN
WORKING ON THIS ORDINANCE SINCE
BEFORE THIS COUNCIL WAS SEATED
AND COUNCIL MEMBER ACKMANN IN
PARTICULAR TOOK IT OVER AND
KEPT COMING BACK WITH IT.
AND SO WE ARE I JUST FEEL
REALLY GRATEFUL THAT IT LOOKS
SO SIMPLE BUT IT JUST WASN'T
SIMPLE AT ALL AND I THINK IT
WILL MAKE A REAL DIFFERENCE FOR
PEOPLE BECAUSE IT IS VERY
UNPLEASANT TO BE TRYING TO DO
SOMETHING THAT YOU KNOW, TO BE
GOOD FOR THE ENVIRONMENT AND TO
GET A TICKET FOR IT.
>> IT JUST MAKES YOU FEEL LIKE
YOUR CITY IS NOT ALIGNED WITH
YOUR VALUES AND THAT'S NOT
TRUE.
>> SO
THIS IS A REALLY
IMPORTANT ORDINANCE AND AGAIN
MY GRATITUDE COUNCIL MEMBER
DENHA.
THANK YOU MAYOR.
ONCE AGAIN I'D LIKE TO THANK
THE SPONSORS AND THE CITY STAFF
FOR THEIR HARD WORK ON THIS
ORDINANCE.
AS WE JUST HEARD, IT'S A LONG
TIME COMING.
AS I'VE MENTIONED PREVIOUSLY,
I'M VERY SUPPORTIVE OF SOME
OF THE MAJOR ASPECTS OF THIS
ORDINANCE, PARTICULARLY THE
WORK TO IMPROVE SIGHTLINES AND
IMPROVE POLLINATOR FRIENDLY
LAWNS THAT SIDE I CANNOT
SUPPORT THE COMPLETE
ELIMINATION HEIGHT REQUIREMENTS
WITH RESPECT TO NON-NATIVE TURF
GRASS WHICH HAS EXTREMELY
LIMITED ECONOMIC ECOLOGICAL
BENEFIT.
A COUPLE OF WEEKS AGO I
COMMUNICATED WITH THE FIRE
CHIEF ABOUT MY CONCERNS THAT
UNMAINTAINED TURF GRASS
PARTICULARLY IN DRY SUMMER
MONTHS IS HIGHLY FLAMMABLE AND
CAN ACT AS A LADDER IF YOU WILL
TO SPREAD FIRES.
WELL, HE NOTED THAT THE OVERALL
FIRE RISK OF LARGE FIRES BEING
SPREAD FROM OVERGROWN
VEGETATION REMAINS RELATIVELY
LOW TO ANN ARBOR DUE TO ANN NON
DROUGHT CONDITIONS.
THE FIRE DEPARTMENT'S PRIMARY
CONCERN IS THE SAFETY
OF INDIVIDUAL RESIDENCES WITH
EXCESSIVE VEGETATION.
HE POINTED ME TO THE TWENTY
TWENTY ONE INTERNATIONAL FIRE
CODE ANN ARBOR BEGAN ENFORCING
EARLIER THIS YEAR THAT STATES
QUOTE WEEDS, GRASS FINES AND
OTHER GROWTH THAT IS CAPABLE
OF BEING IGNITED AND
ENDANGERING PROPERTY SHALL BE
CUT DOWN AND REMOVED BY THE
OWNER OR OCCUPANT OF THE
PREMISES.
ADDITIONALLY, I CANNOT SUPPORT
REMOVING A TOOL THE CITY HAS TO
TAKE ACTION ON BLIGHTED OR
VACANT PROPERTIES AND ABSENTEE
LANDLORDS WHO ARE NEGLECTING
THEIR PROPERTIES AND I CONTINUE
TO HAVE CONCERNS ABOUT
ENCOURAGING NEW NON-NATIVE
HABITATS FOR PESTS LIKE
MOSQUITOES, TICKS, FLEAS AND
RODENTS THAT POSE PUBLIC HEALTH
RISKS.
THESE ARE CONCERNS SHARED BY
OUR FIRE CHIEF AS WELL WHO SAID
QUOTE I SHARE YOUR CONCERNS
ABOUT REMOVING A TOOL THAT
HELPS US ADDRESS BLIGHTED OR
VACANT PROPERTIES AND REDUCE
HABITATS FOR PESTS SUCH AS
TICKS AND RODENTS.
A PHD PARTICIPATE IN THE
REGIONAL HOARDING TASK FORCE
AND WE FREQUENTLY SEE A STRONG
CORRELATION BETWEEN INTERIOR
HOARDING CONDITIONS AND
EXTERIOR OVERGROWTH OR
ACCUMULATION.
THEREFORE, DESPITE MY DEEP
APPRECIATION FOR SOME OF THE
IMPROVEMENTS THAT PARTS OF THIS
ORDINANCE WILL MAKE WITH THESE
REMAINING CONCERNS WITH RESPECT
TO UNMAINTAINED NON-NATIVE TURF
GRASS I WILL VOTE NO TONIGHT.
>> THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
.
>> ROLL CALL THOUGH PLEASE.
STARTING WITH
COUNCIL MEMBER
MALIK POTTSBORO MALIK YES
KOTARO DENHA NO CUSTOMER GHAZI
EDWYN ABSENT MAYOR TAYLOR YES.
CUSTOMER AYA YES.
CUSTOMER ACKMANN ABSENT HELFER
BRIGS YES CUSTOMER CORNELL YES.
CUSTOMER DISH YES.
CUSTOMER HARRISON YES CUSTOMER
WATSON YES MOTION CARRIES
FURTHER AURA THAT'S UP DC ONE
RESOLUTION TO AUTHORIZE
SETTLEMENT OF THE LOBBY OF THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR DANIEL
HORNING AND CITIZENS UNITED
RECIPROCAL EXCHANGE WASHTENAW
COUNTY CIRCUIT COURT CASE
NUMBER TWO FIVE ZERO ZERO ONE
NINE ZERO NINE MOVE BY COUNCIL
MEMBERS SECOND BY COUNCIL
MEMBER A DENHA DISCUSSION
PLEASE OF DC ONE ON FAVOR WHILE
OPPOSED IT IS APPROVED DC TWO
RESOLUTION TO PROVIDE A PUBLIC
SUMMARY OF A OF THE PROPOSED
PUBLIC PRIVATE DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE DEVELOPER
VANDERBURGH S M THE CITY THAT
ARBER MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
DISH SECOND BY COUNCIL MEMBER
RE DENHA DISCUSSION PLEASE
OF DC TO COUNT THE BRITISH I
THINK MR JUST COVIC SPOKE
ALREADY VERY ELOQUENTLY FOR
THIS BUT I WILL VERY QUICKLY
SAY THAT THE PURPOSE OF THIS
SUMMARY IS TO ANSWER PUBLIC
CONCERNS ABOUT THE TERMS OF THE
PARTNERSHIP BETWEEN THE CITY
AND THE DEVELOPER.
THERE IS THE FULL DOCUMENT OVER
125 PAGES AND SO WE FELT THAT A
SUMMARY WOULD BE USEFUL FOR THE
PUBLIC THIS IS ONE OF THE PARTS
WHERE ISSUES OF RISK ARE
ADDRESSED AMONG AMONG OTHER
THINGS AND WHETHER IT ASSUAGES
CONCERNS THAT MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC HAVE OR HELPS THEM
BETTER ARTICULATE THEIR
CRITICISMS, I THINK IT WILL BE
WORTHWHILE TO MAKE THIS
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE FOR THE
DISCUSSION.
>> I'LL JUST BASICALLY ECHO
THAT ONE OF THE YOU KNOW, THERE
IS AN INFORMATION ASYMMETRY
BETWEEN COUNCIL MEMBERS AND
MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC BECAUSE
WE HAVE ACCESS TO CONFIDENTIAL
INFORMATION.
WE HAVE ACCESS TO STAFF
EXPERTIZE AND WHILE WE AS A
MUNICIPAL ORGANIZATION AND A
GROUP MAKE I THINK GREAT
EFFORTS AND AND USUALLY
TYPICALLY SUCCESSFUL EFFORTS TO
BE TRANSPARENT AND
COMMUNICATIVE NEVERTHELESS THAT
INFORMATION ASYMMETRY EXISTS
THERE HAVE BEEN A FAIR NUMBER
OF QUESTIONS PRESENTED WITH
RESPECT TO THIS MATTER.
AND SO WHILE I THINK A NUMBER
OF COUNCIL MEMBERS WHILE
COUNCIL MEMBERS HAVE RECEIVED
THE BENEFIT OF STAFF EXPERTIZE
IN CONNECTION WITH THOSE
QUESTIONS NOT ALL THOSE
QUESTIONS HAVE BEEN ANSWERED
AND ADDRESSED IN A PUBLIC
FASHION.
AND WHILE THIS WILL NOT PERHAPS
BE A COMPREHENSIVE ARTICULATION
THAT WILL OF COURSE MOVE THE
NEEDLE AND PROVIDE THE PUBLIC
WITH WITH USEFUL AND ACCURATE
INFORMATION FROM THE STAFF IN
THIS REGARD.
AND SO I'M EXCITED THAT THIS IS
MOVING FORWARD AND I'M GRATEFUL
FOR THE SPONSORS FOR BRINGING
IT TO THE THE ATTENTION COUNCIL
MEMBER.
>> THANKS.
JUST ADD A LITTLE BIT TO THAT.
I APPRECIATE COUNCIL MEMBER
JOSH BEING THE LEAD SPONSOR ON
THIS AND I CERTAINLY THINK THIS
IS A GREAT WAY TO ENHANCE THE
TRANSPARENCY AROUND THIS.
THIS IS A HIGHLY TECHNICAL
DOCUMENT AND IT'S I KNOW
PERSONALLY EASY TO GET CONFUSED
FROM THE DETAILS OF IT SO AND I
HAVE HAD MORE EXPOSURE TO IT
THAN CERTAINLY MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC.
>> SO I APPRECIATE, YOU KNOW,
THE SUPPORT FOR FOR BRINGING
THIS FORWARD.
I THAT THERE'S SORT OF ONGOING
CONVERSATIONS AS WELL AROUND
ARBER S AND I HOPE THAT BEFORE
WE SORT OF EVEN PLACE THIS
SUMMARY ON THE AGENDA THAT THIS
IF THERE ARE ANY ADDITIONAL
SORT OF CHANGES THAT MIGHT
HAPPEN WITHIN THE CONTEXT
OF THAT PUBLIC PRIVATE
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT THAT THAT
THAT WOULD ALSO BE A PART
OF THAT.
>> THE SUMMARY FURTHER
DISCUSSION WELL FAVOR POSED IT
IS APPROVED D ONE RESOLUTION TO
APPROVE A BROWNFIELD PLAN FOR
TOWNY HOMES AT 1780 AND 1788
SAY CHURCH ROAD TO TWENTY FIVE
AND TO THIRTY FIVE S WAGNER
ROAD FIFTEEN THIRTY FIVE
FIFTEEN SIXTY-THREE FIFTEEN
SIXTY FIVE AND 15 67 S MAPLE
ROAD AND TWELVE EIGHTY EIGHT
AND THIRTEEN SIXTY NINE JEWITT
AVENUE MOVED BY COUNCIL MEMBER
DISH SECONDED BY COUNCIL MEMBER
MALLIK DISCUSSION PLEASE OF D
S1 COUNCIL MEMBER DISH
I WILL
VOTE YES TO APPROVE THIS
BROWNFIELD PLAN AND AGAIN WE
HAVE THIS QUESTION I JUST WANT
TO MAKE CLEAR THAT THIS PROJECT
IS ELIGIBLE FOR A BROWNFIELD TO
FUNDING UNDER THE NEW TWENTY
TWENTY THREE PROGRAM THAT IS
DESIGNED SPECIFICALLY TO MAKE
IT POSSIBLE TO CONSTRUCT
HOUSING THAT IS TO BE SOLD AT A
PRICE LOWER IN THE COST OF ITS
CONSTRUCTION.
AND WE HAVE MENTIONED AT THIS
TABLE MANY, MANY TIMES THAT
PART OF OUR PROBLEM WITH NOT
HAVING AFFORDABLE HOUSING IN
THIS CITY IS THAT IT COSTS
ALREADY JUST TO BUILD IT EVEN
IF YOU DON'T PUT A MARBLE
COUNTER IN IT IT WILL BE
UNAFFORDABLE.
I DON'T KNOW IF MARBLE IS
FASHIONABLE ANYMORE.
>> IT'S NOT WHAT I HAVE ANYWAY.
SO WE'VE HEARD THE DETAILS
OF THE PROPOSAL.
>> IT'S VERY WELL CRAFTED IT IT
IS A THIRTY YEAR TAX INCREMENT
FINANCING AGREEMENT THAT
INVOLVES A TOTAL ESTIMATED
PRIVATE INVESTMENT OF ALMOST
TEN MILLION AND AN INVESTMENT
OF PUBLIC MONEYS TOTALING JUST
OVER FIVE MILLION.
>> IMPORTANT DETAILS FOR ME
BECAUSE THESE CAME UP ON THE
PLANNING COMMISSION IS THAT TO
ENSURE AFFORDABILITY THE HOMES
WILL BE DEED RESTRICTED SO THAT
THEY CAN ONLY BE SOLD TO
HOUSEHOLDS AT INCOMES BETWEEN
RANGING FROM 60 TO 80 SORRY I'M
SORRY 30 TO 90 PERCENT OF AMAI
.
>> AND IT'S IMPORTANT TO SAY
THAT FOR THE 30 YEAR TERM
OF THE BROWNFIELD PLAN THE
COUNTY BROWNFIELD AUTHORITY
WILL ENSURE COMPLIANCE WITH THE
AFFORDABILITY REQUIREMENT AND
THAT THE ANN ARBOR COMMUNITY
COMMUNITY LAND TRUSTS DEED
RESTRICTION WILL WILL ALSO
PROVIDE ADDITIONAL ASSURANCE
THAT VIOLATIONS CAN BE REMEDIED
IF THEY OCCUR.
>> I WANT TO MAKE THE POINT
THAT WHEN ANN ARBOR HOUSING
COMMISSION BUILDS AFFORDABLE
HOUSING ON PUBLICLY OWNED LAND
IT'S PERMANENTLY AFFORDABLE AND
IN THIS CASE THE COMMUNITY LAND
TRUST INTENDS TO ENSURE THAT
THIS DEED RESTRICTION ENSURING
AFFORDABILITY WILL BE HONORED
BEYOND 30 YEARS.
>> I THINK THE PROJECT WARRANTS
THE EXPENDITURE EVEN IF THEY
AREN'T ABLE TO FILL THIS INTENT
BUT I WANT TO EMPHASIZE AND
EVERYONE SHOULD LOOK AT THE
STAFF AGENDA QUESTION MEMO I
WANT TO EMPHASIZE THAT THE
COMMUNITY LAND TRUST IS
ESTABLISHING A LEGAL FRAMEWORK
TO ENSURE THAT THEY CAN MEET
THAT INTENTION AND THAT THESE
WILL BE PERMANENTLY AFFORDABLE
.
>> SO I WOULD LIKE TO NOTE ALSO
THAT THERE ARE ENERGY
EFFICIENCY OR ELECTRICITY
REQUIREMENTS AS PART OF THIS
BROWNFIELD PLAN AND ONE OF THE
REASONS FOR THAT IS THAT IT
WOULD BE IT WOULD MAKE THE
HOMES UNAFFORDABLE BY ALONG BY
QUITE A BIG LEAP.
>> AND I WANT TO EMPHASIZE THAT
THERE IS NO NEED TO EXPECT THAT
EVERY PROJECT MEETS EVERY CITY
PRIORITY AND THIS ONE NEEDS A
REAL GAP AND I AM GRATEFUL TO
SEE IT AND LOOK FORWARD TO THE
GROUND BREAKING COUNCIL.
CORNELL.
>> THANK YOU, COUNCIL MEMBER
FOR GOING OVER ALL LITTLE
DETAILS.
I WANTED TO JUST ADDRESS THE
MICHIGAN STATE HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY HAS
IDENTIFIED ANN ARBOR WEST WHERE
THE MAJORITY OF THESE UNITS ARE
LOCATED.
>> IS THESE HOUSES AS BOTH A
HIGH COST AND GROWING MARKET
AND ANN ARBOR WEST THE STATE
HAS IDENTIFIED THAT 30 THERE'S
BEEN SINCE TWENTY SIXTEEN TO
TWENTY TWENTY ONE MOST RECENT
DATA SET AVAILABLE HOME PRICES
HAVE INCREASED THIRTY TWO
PERCENT AND WHEN YOU COUPLE
THAT WITH A FOUR PERCENT FOUR
POINT ONE PERCENT IF WE'RE
GOING TO BE TECHNICAL VACANCY
RATE THERE IS NOT ENOUGH
HOUSING STOCK FOR THE DEMAND
FURTHER.
>> TWENTY FIVE PERCENT
OF THE
HOUSEHOLDS AVAILABLE IN THIS
AREA WHETHER OR NOT THEY'RE
VACANT RIGHT NOW OR JUST
AVAILABLE ONLY TWENTY FIVE
PERCENT ARE IN THE SIXTY TO ONE
HUNDRED TWENTY FIVE ONE HUNDRED
AND TWENTY PERCENT AM I AND
THIS TO ME IS REALLY EXCITING
BECAUSE IT'S THE FIRST IN SINCE
I'VE SERVED ON COUNCIL AND
WE'RE GOING TO REALLY ADDRESS
THAT MISSING MIDDLE
REPRESENTATION IN THE MARKET.
THAT'S SOMETHING THROUGHOUT THE
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
DISCUSSIONS ALL OF THE DATA AND
RESEARCH THAT HAVE GONE INTO
THAT WE KNOW IS THAT ONLY AN
ACUTE NEED HERE IN WASHINGTON
COUNTY, IN ANN ARBOR AND IN THE
STATE.
>> SO TO SEE THIS PROCEED AND
TO KNOW HOW MUCH TIME AND
THOUGHTFULNESS AND WORKING WITH
CITY STAFF AND COUNTY STAFF
THIS PROPOSAL HAS SHE HAS TAKEN
SHAPE AND TO COUNCIL MEMBER
DISHES POINTS ALL OF THE
ASSURANCES AND SAFEGUARDS THAT
THIS WILL REMAIN AFFORDABLE
HOUSING AND REALLY FOR A LONG
TERM THIRTY YEARS ADDRESS WHAT
WE'RE SEEING IN TERMS OF THAT.
SIXTY TWO TWENTY ONE ONE
HUNDRED TWENTY PERCENT AM I AND
TO MEET THAT MISSING MIDDLE
REPRESENTATION SO I'M AN
ENTHUSIASTIC YES ON THIS
BROWNFIELD IF COUNCIL MEMBER
MALIK THANK YOU MAYOR.
>> THIS IS AN EXCITING ITEM ON
OUR AGENDA TONIGHT.
>> AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECTS
ARE DIFFICULT TO FINANCE AND
THIS CANNOT BE OVERSTATED.
>> THIS IS BECAUSE BUILDING
AFFORDABLE HOUSING COSTS THE
SAME AS BUILDING MARKET RATE
HOUSING.
>> UNFORTUNATELY THE CITY OR
BUILDERS OF CERTAIN PROJECTS
DON'T GET MEANINGFUL DISCOUNTS
JUST BECAUSE WHAT THEY ARE
BUILDING WILL BE AFFORDABLE
ONCE COMPLETE AVAILABLE FUNDING
TO COVER THE GAP TO MAKE
AFFORDABLE HOUSING POSSIBLE IS
OFTEN SCARCE AND COMPETITIVE
SUCH AS WITH THE SINGLE BIGGEST
SOURCE OF FUNDING TYPICAL
AVAILABLE TO US THE LOW INCOME
HOUSING TAX CREDIT DEVELOPMENT
IS LONG, DIFFICULT AND COMPLEX
NOT TO MENTION COMPLICATED
BECAUSE OF THIS REALITY.
>> AFFORDABLE HOUSING REQUIRES
CREATIVE SOLUTIONS.
>> THIS PROJECT ADDRESSES A
MISSING MIDDLE HOUSING TYPOLOGY
WHILE PROVIDING AFFORDABLE
UNITS THROUGH NEW TAXES THAT
WOULD NOT EXIST.
>> BUT FOR THESE VARIOUS
PROJECTS BROWNFIELD PLANS ARE
AN IMPACTFUL TOOL IN OUR
TOOLBOX AND I'M EXCITED TO SEE
US PLANNING TO USE IT IN THIS
WAY TO COVER THE AFFORDABILITY
GAP FOR THESE PLANNED HOUSES.
I WANT TO THANK ALL THOSE
INVOLVED WITH THIS TREMENDOUS
EFFORT AND LOOK FORWARD TO
SEEING THESE HOMES COME TO
FRUITION.
>> THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION
.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER BRAKE'S JUST
ADD MY ENTHUSIASM TO THE
COURSE.
APPRECIATE ALL THE WORK THAT
THE COMMUNITY LAND TRUST HAS
BEEN DOING ON THIS.
IT'S VERY CLEAR THAT THIS IS
SOMETHING THAT IS MET WITH
ENTHUSIASM BOTH AROUND THIS
TABLE AND FROM THE COMMUNITY AT
LARGE.
>> SOME OF THE THINGS WE HAVE
HEARD OVER SUPPORT FOR
CERTAINLY THIS IS A I HAVE NOT
HEARD ANYBODY WHO IS NOT
SUPPORTIVE LET ME PUT IT THAT.
>> AND SO I THINK THAT THE MORE
TOOLS AND OPPORTUNITIES THAT WE
HAVE AS WE MOVE FORWARD WITH
OUR ADOPTION OF OUR
COMPREHENSIVE LAND USE PLAN
EVENTUALLY AND FUTURE ZONING
CHANGES THAT ENABLE MORE THIS
TYPE OF WORK I THINK WILL BE
MET WITH CONTINUED ENTHUSIASM
IN OUR COMMUNITY.
SO THANK YOU FOR LEADING THIS
CHARGE.
I ALSO JUST WANT TO READ OUT
LOUD A PORTION THAT ONE OF THE
QUESTIONS YOU WOULD ASK THAT'S
IN OUR AGENDA RESPONSES BECAUSE
IT'S THE ONLY QUESTION THAT
I'VE RECEIVED AND IT IS THERE
IS A STAFF RESPONSE HERE IN
TERMS OF I THINK THERE IS
DESIRE TO SEE THESE REMAIN
AFFORDABLE FOR MORE THAN THE
THIRTY YEARS AND THAT IS I
THINK IT IS CLEARLY YOUR INTENT
AS WELL.
OUR STAFF MEMBER READS THE LAND
TRUST HIS INFORMED STAFF THAT
THEIR DEED RESTRICTION IS
WRITTEN WITH THE NINETY NINE
YEAR RENEWABLE AFFORDABILITY
TERM THAT THE RIGHT OF FIRST
REFUSAL FOR ALL ALL SALES BY
THAT PROVISION AND THAT THE
ANERA COMMUNITY LAND TRUST
HOMES WILL ALSO BE CONDOMINIUMS
WITH A MASTER EITHER INCLUDES
THE AFFORDABILITY RESTRICTIONS.
>> SO THIS THIS IS CONSISTENT
WITH SORT OF BEST PRACTICES AND
I'M GLAD TO SEE THAT INCLUDED
IN THIS FURTHER DISCUSSION.
>> COUNCIL MEMBER DENHA.
THANK YOU MAYOR.
VERY BRIEFLY SO MUCH OF THE
PRAISE I WOULD HAVE HEAPED ON
THIS HAS ALREADY BEEN SAID BY
MY COLLEAGUES.
I JUST WANT TO CONGRATULATE
EVERYBODY WHO'S BEEN INVOLVED
IN THIS.
THANK YOU FOR THE HARD WORK
THAT'S GONE INTO IT.
I KNOW THAT IT'S BEEN A LONG
TIME COMING.
YEARS OF WORK HAVE GONE INTO
GETTING US HERE.
I KNOW BECAUSE MANY OF YOU HAVE
HAD CONVERSATIONS WITH ALL
OF OVER THOSE HERE OVER THOSE
YEARS, PARTICULARLY MY MY
CONSTITUENT MR. CHAMBERS WHO
HAS HAD A NUMBER
OF CONVERSATIONS WITH ME ABOUT
THIS AND IS INCREDIBLY
PASSIONATE ABOUT THIS WORK.
I ALSO JUST WANT TO CONTINUE TO
THANK OUR STAFF WHO'S
PARTICIPATED IN MAKING THIS
POSSIBLE.
I KNOW THAT MR. GIANT IS A
RELATIVELY NEW ADDITION TO OUR
STAFF BUT CONTINUES TO MAKE A
HUGE IMPACT ON SOME OF THE
PRIORITIES THAT WE HAVE AS A
CITY.
AND SO SO THANK YOU TO
EVERYBODY EVERYONE WAS
INVOLVED.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR THE
DISCUSSION, COUNCILMAN WATSON.
>> MR. VODE FROM THE COUNTY IS
ALWAYS KIND ENOUGH TO COME DOWN
HERE EVEN THOUGH WE DON'T
USUALLY ASK HIM TOO MANY
QUESTIONS.
I WAS WONDERING IF I COULD ASK
YOU A QUESTION JUST ABOUT THE
BROAD BROWNFIELD FAIR HOUSING
PLAN AND SOME OTHER PROJECTS
WE'VE BEEN SEEING COUNTYWIDE
HERE.
>> WE TALKED A LITTLE BIT I
THINK THAT URBAN COUNTY I HAD
ASKED ABOUT SOME OTHER
COMMUNITIES THAT ARE TAKING
ADVANTAGE OF THIS AND I WAS
WONDERING ARE THERE THINGS
WE'RE LEARNING FROM OTHER
COMMUNITIES TAKING ADVANTAGE
OF THIS BROWNFIELD FOR HOUSING
CREDIT AND THEN ARE THERE ALSO
THINGS WE'RE LEARNING FROM I'M
THINKING OF THINGS LIKE DORSEY
ESTATES AS WELL WHERE WE'RE
DOING THE ELIGIBILITY AND OKD
IS IN CHARGE PARTS OF THAT I
WOULD SAY ARE STILL IN THE
PLANNING STAGES HAVING A LOT
OF CONVERSATIONS WITH VARIOUS
DEVELOPERS COMMUNITIES NOT JUST
ANN ARBOR IPSI SELINE, CHELSEA
DAXTER.
OUR FIRST PLAN ACTUALLY IS IN
MANCHESTER.
IT'S GOING FOR ADOPTION THIS
WEDNESDAY NIGHT AT THE COUNTY
SO THEY BEAT US TO THE PUNCH
HERE IN ANN ARBOR BUT THAT'S OK
.
THEY WERE SURPRISED AT THAT SO
I THINK IT'S EARLY.
WE'RE STILL TRYING TO FIGURE
OUT THE BEST WAY TO APPLY THE
TOOL, HOW TO USE IT, HOW THE
NUMBERS WORK.
DORSEY INTERESTINGLY WAS PRIOR
TO TWENTY TWENTY THREE AND SO
WE USED A DIFFERENT APPROACH
INTO A LOCAL ONLY TO SUPPORT
FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
PURPOSES WHICH IS IN THE ACT
ABOUT EIGHT HUNDRED THOUSAND
FOR THAT USING LOCAL TIF BUT
NOW THAT HAS BEEN FORMALIZED WE
CAN DO WHAT WE'RE DOING TONIGHT
WHICH IS USING ALL THE TAXING
CAPTURE AVAILABLE TO BRING TO
BEAR ALL THAT ALL THAT WE CAN
TO SUPPORT AFFORDABILITY.
>> THANK YOU AND JUST PASSING
ALONG CONGRATULATIONS.
AND I DO WANT TO JUST ALSO
HIGHLIGHT, YOU KNOW, THE WORK
OF THE COMMUNITY LAND TRUST AND
SARAH ARIN'S AND PETER ALLEN
AND SO MANY WHO HAVE COME
FORWARD WITH THESE IDEAS AND I
THINK IT'S JUST AS A COMMENTARY
KIND OF ALLUDED TO IT'S ALWAYS
BEEN BOTH AND NOT EITHER OR
WHEN IT COMES TO AFFORDABILITY,
HOMEOWNERSHIP RENTAL AND INCOME
ACCESS AT ALL INCOME LEVELS FOR
THEIR DISCUSSION.
FOR MY PART FINALLY TO I WOULD
LIKE TO THANK THE THE GOOD
FOLKS THE COMMUNITY LAND TRUSTS
FOR HAVING THE VISION TO AND
STICK TO IT IF THIS TO BRING
THIS PROJECT TO TO THE STAGE
AND HAVE CONFIDENCE THAT IT
WILL GO ON TO THE NEXT AND BE A
GREAT AND GLORIOUS THING.
I'M GRATEFUL FOR STAFFS BOTH
COUNTY AND CITY FOR WORKING
TOGETHER AND WORKING WITH WITH
THE COMMUNITY LAND TRUST TO
ENABLE US TO PARTICIPATE IN
THIS WAY.
IT'S A GREAT OPPORTUNITY FOR US
ALL TO MEET A DEEP AND PROFOUND
NEED IN OUR CITY FOR FOUR NEW
HOUSING KAEDE AT AN INCOME
LEVEL THAT GETS ALL TOO OFTEN
TOO LITTLE ATTENTION.
YOU KNOW OUR GOAL HERE AT THE
TABLE AND AS A COMMUNITY IS TO
EXPAND HOUSING CHOICES, EXPAND
HOUSING OPTIONS.
THIS IS AN OUTSTANDING EXAMPLE
OF THAT IN ACTION AND I LOOK
FORWARD TO THE NEXT BIGGER
THING.
THANK YOU FOR THE DISCUSSION ON
FAVORITE OPPOSED IT IS APPROVED
.
DO WE HAVE THE PLEASURE A
CLOSED SESSION TODAY?
NO THANK YOU MAYOR.
WE HAVE BEFORE US THE REPORT
OF COMMUNICATIONS PETITIONS AND
REFERRALS CAN HAVE A MOTION
PLEASE TO APPROVE THE CLERK'S
SUPPORT MOVE BY COUNCIL MEMBER
DESH SECONDED BY COUNCIL MEMBER
WATSON DISCUSSION OR FAVOR OR
OPPOSED IS APPROVED.
>> DO WE HAVE COMMUNICATION
TODAY FROM OUR CITY ATTORNEY?
NO THANK YOU MAYOR.
IN THE ABSENCE OF PUBLIC
COMMENT OVERFLOW MAY I HAVE A
MOTION TO ADJOURN PLEASE MOVE
BY COUNCIL MEMBER ALEC SECONDED
BY COUNCIL MEMBER CORNELL
DISCUSSION ON THIRD POST WERE
ADJOURNED